iMed project website: https://imedproject.org/

## How to work on FAQ section

FAQ page consists of 3 parts:

* Top 5 FAQ
* List of all questions with short answers
* Full answers

### Edit top 5 FAQ

You need to edit it from `/content/faq/_index.md` file. This part of the page is written by hand so you can simply modify it directly.

### Edit list of all questions, short answers + full answers

These two parts of the page is generated by Hugo. Each document in `/content/faq/` directory is considered as a single FAQ - its title property is a Question, while its content is a full Answer. A short answer is the first 150 characters of the full answer.

Below is an example of how the content would look like:

```
.
└── content
    └── faq
        |── _index.md
        |── first-faq.md
        └── second-faq.md
```



## Technical Stuff

This website is a static website.

* The source is managed in git.
  * The central git repo is on gitlab: https://gitlab.com/artearthtech/imedproject.org
* The website is statically built using [hugo][].

[hugo]: https://gohugo.io/

### To work on the website locally

* Install [hugo]
* Install git lfs and pull git large files
* git clone the repo:

  `git clone git@gitlab.com:artearthtech/imedproject.org.git`
* Run hugo:

  `hugo server`

### Extras

To build the CSS from the SASS:

1. Install sass (e.g. `brew install sass`)
2. Run:

   `sass --watch static/scss:static/css`


### Deploying the website

We deploy the website live using gitlab pipelines.

Just `git push` and the new version of the site will go live.

If you want to learn more about how this happens see `.gitlab-ci.yml` file.
