---
title: What is wrong with the current system?
date: 2018-03-18
weight: 1
---

 Millions of people do not have access to medicines because of the high prices charged to recoup the costs of research. With an increase in the price of medicines, and a decrease in the therapeutic benefits associated with new innovations: the trajectory of the current financing of pharmaceutical R&D system is unsustainable. Governments or health care providers will not be able to afford to buy medicines for their citizens at this rate.

Pharmaceutical research and development has delivered some of the
greatest achievements of the modern age, eradicating sources that have
terrorized humanity for generations and improving the health and quality
of life of billions. But it is increasingly clear that the system by
which we finance this progress is broken. Around the world millions lack
access to the medicines they need to survive and thrive and the source
of the problem is several folds. First, the trajectory of the current
financing of pharmaceutical R&D system is unsustainable, and Governments
or health care providers will not be able to afford to buy medicines for
their citizens at this rate. Second, drugs are often just too expensive,
preventing millions of people from getting access to the treatment they
need.
Third, innovation is inefficiently incentivised, resulting in not
getting new drugs for the illnesses we face. Notably, research is often
slowed by legal disputes and licensing restrictions and a
disproportionate amount of resources are used on areas with limited
health impact. The patent system is at the cause of these tensions, as
high prices for drugs are necessary to fund research and development.

**Why is the trajectory of the current system is unsustainable?**

Pharmaceutical research and development (R&D) in a context of rising
prices combined with an aging population, demographic growth and falling
therapeutic benefit make for an unsustainable system. The past decades
have seen an increase in the price of medicines, and a decrease in the
therapeutic benefits associated with new innovations.[^1] Projections
suggest these trends will continue. The system for funding R&D is
broken, and heading for catastrophe. It is therefore imperative to take
action before the price of healthcare becomes completely unsustainable,
and the number of new medicines dwindles. Governments will not be able
to afford to buy medicines for their citizens at this rate.[^2] Such an
outcome would not only spell disaster for state budgets and ordinary
citizens, but also for pharmaceutical companies' profits. Bankrupted
healthcare providers will no longer be able to purchase from
pharmaceutical companies if prices rise indefinitely. Everyone has a
stake in changing the system to preserve both rewards for innovation and
access to medicines.

**Why do millions of people cannot get access to the treatments they
need?**

Millions of people do not have access to medicines because of the high
prices charged to recoup the costs of research, and many urgent health
problems go without treatments because of the lack of a profitable
market. The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that around a
third of the world's population does not have access to
medicines.[^3]Affordability, a combination of price, cost and
availability of funds, is a primary concern.[^4] If this particularly
affects those living in poorer countries, governments of wealthier
countries have also become unable to meet the rising costs of new
medicines. Consequently, millions of people go without treatment or
experience delays. See more details and estimates in our [White Paper](research/white-paper/), section .

**Why is innovation inefficient and money for R&D poorly allocated? Why
aren't we getting the medicines for the illnesses we face?**

The distribution of R&D does not reflect actual health needs we face on
a global scale. Because financial incentives for innovation are tied to
the market, unprofitable but important areas of health are neglected;
simultaneously, profitable but relatively insignificant areas in terms
of health impact are heavily invested in. Additionally, there are
structural blockers to research, such as patent disputes and licensing
restrictions which unnecessarily delays and hinders us from receiving
the most cutting edge innovation

**The patent system produces the tension between access and innovation**

These failures in access are a natural consequence of how we fund and
incentivize medical innovation. Today, innovators are awarded a monopoly
right on their inventions - a patent - which affords them exclusive
marketing rights over the resulting product. As the research and
development of new drugs is an extraordinarily expensive endeavor, the
final prices innovators set on drugs are often very high in order to
recoup costs, even though the actual drug itself may be relatively cheap
to produce. As innovators are only paid through the final sale of the
drug, prices must be high to cover these research costs. Necessarily,
these high prices limit the number of people able to access the drug. If
the current trends in prices and innovation continue, these problems
will worsen over the coming years and become untenable. It is therefore
essential that we find solutions to them now.

[^1]: Rabah Kamal and Cynthia Cox "What Are the Recent and Forecasted
    Trends in Prescription Drug Spending?" Peterson-Kaiser Health System
    Tracker; "Health Spending Explorer" Peterson-Kaiser Health System
    Tracker; "A Look Back at Pharmaceuticals in 2006: Aggressive
    Advertising Cannot Hide the Absence of Therapeutic Advances"; "New
    Products and New Indications in 2016: A System That Favours
    Imitation over the Pursuit of Real Progress."

[^2]: "Pharma 2020: The Vision Which Path Will You Take?", p. 12.

[^3]: Frost, Reich, and others, *Access*, p. 2; "Delivering on the
    Global Partnership for Achieving the Millennium Development Goals",
    p. 43.

[^4]: Frost, Reich, and others, *Access*, p. 26.
