---
title: Why not fund everything through traditional grants?
date: 2018-03-14
weight: 2
---

Grants are a push funding mechanism: they fund research upfront. Grants are the most suitable mechanisms for early stage research and funding is not tied to specific outcomes, allowing exploratory work. With no incentive to translate research into a marketable product grants have little to do with access or impact based innovation.

Grants are a push funding mechanism: grants fund research upfront.[^5]
Currently, grants are widely used for funding medical R&D, and are
uncontroversial. Even strong opponents of the current system agree that
grants should continue to operate as a funding mechanism.[^6] Grants are
the most suitable mechanisms for early stage research, as information
remains open for others to build upon and funding is not tied to
specific outcomes, allowing exploratory work. Among the many proposals
to improve the current state of medical R&D, few proposals concern
improving the grants system, which also suggests that this funding
mechanism is working reasonably.[^7]

However, despite their great advantages as a funding mechanism, grants
have little to do with access or impact based innovation.

With a priority on early stage exploration, grants provide no incentive
to translate research into a marketable product. Further development is
usually undertaken subsequently by commercial firms who then patent the
results.[^8] This makes grant funding far removed and poorly suited to
dealing with the problem of access.

With regards to health impact, grant funding does provide a significant
boost to innovation, but does not exert strong incentives regarding
health impact because grants are provided upfront, and it is very
difficult to predict health impact before the research is transformed
into a marketable product. It might also be undesirable for all funding
to be directly tied to health impact: we need basic exploratory
research, and grant funding is excellent at resourcing this. Though
grant funding will remain, its functioning is only distantly related to
the problems of access and impact-based innovation.

[^5]: Ravvin, "Incentivizing Access and Innovation for Essential
    Medicines", p. 115.

[^6]: Stiglitz, "Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property Rights",
    p. 1724; Love and Hubbard, "The Big Idea", p. 1553.

[^7]: An exception is the recent development of direct government grants
    to small and medium companies, especially in developing economies,
    for R&D and capacity building. See Paul Cunningham, Abdullah GÃ¶k,
    and Philippe Laredo, "The Impact of Direct Support to R&D and
    Innovation in Firms."

[^8]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 102; Ravvin, "Incentivizing Access and
    Innovation for Essential Medicines", pp. 115-116.
