---
title: Remuneration Rights, an innovative two-part payment system for funding medicines
date: 2018-03-09
---

Executive summary
=================

Today, millions of people around the world lack access to life-saving medicines because of high prices or lack of innovation. Health providers are in crisis, and have to make tough choices about what drugs they can afford to provide.

The source of the problem lies in how we reward medical innovation: by providing monopolies in the form of patents. Patents create an unavoidable conflict by using a single, per treatment, payment that must cover the cost of R&D at the same time as manufacturing costs. Under the patent system, innovators need high prices per pill to get paid and these high prices restrict the number of patients that can be treated.

Patents make this conflict between access and innovation inevitable but we could choose to to separate payment for R&D from payment for manufacture. This separation would remove the conflict and deliver strong incentives for innovators at the same time as greatly expanding access to medicines.

In this paper we explore a new model where we reward innovations using remuneration rights, and, in return, innovators provide unrestricted, royalty free access to their innovations for both manufacturing and research purposes. This would allow free-market competition in manufacturing, leading to prices close to cost of manufacturing, as well as faster, freer and more innovative research.

**Is there a need for change?**

The trajectory of the current system is unsustainable. Millions cannot get the treatment they need because of high prices, and innovation is inefficient; important disease areas are neglected, research is often slowed by legal disputes and licensing restrictions and a disproportionate amount of resources are used on areas of limited health impact. The patent system inevitably produces these tensions, as high prices for drugs are necessary to fund research and development.

**Is there an alternative?**

The remuneration rights model offers an alternative to the patent system. A remuneration rights fund would disburse payments to registered innovators based on health impact. In return, innovators would allow open access to all of their information, enabling generic competition in manufacture similar to out of patent medicines today. This would lower the prices of medicines without jeopardizing the funding of future research and development.

Under the remuneration rights system, taxpayers, employers and insurers would contribute towards healthcare payments just as they do today. Governments would pool these payments into an independant fund. Innovators would receive a remuneration right entitling them to a payment from the fund that reflects the health impact of their innovation. Patients would receive medicines in the same way as today,  but at prices close to the cost of manufacture.

**What is the impact on stakeholders?**

Many groups hold a stake in how pharmaceutical research is financed. For some groups, such as politicians, shareholders, investors and basic
researchers, the introduction of a remuneration rights system would make
only limited changes. For others, such as patients, healthcare
professionals, healthcare buyers, employers, insurance companies,
taxpayers, marketers, distributors, manufacturers and innovators, the
remuneration rights system would expand processes which already occur.
There are also groups who would experience new roles as a result of the
remuneration rights system, such as civil servants.

**Are remuneration rights feasible?**

Remuneration rights are technically feasible, and much of the relevant
infrastructure is already in place; we already determine who own
innovations and how rights can be shared between multiple innovators,
and we already measure health impact. Remuneration rights are also
politically feasible; sustainable funding can be ensured, governance
established, and international cooperation achieved. In many instances,
the relevant precedents are already in place under current systems, and
national and international laws already permit remuneration rights.
Moreover, transitions of this scale or larger have been successfully
implemented in the past.

Such a transition can begin locally limited to a particular country or
region and/or specific type of disease. Importantly it can operate in
parallel with the patent system. A starting point would be a detailed
feasibility study, followed by a pilot implementation of remuneration
rights on a limited basis.

**Are remuneration rights an improvement on patents?**

The key criteria for assessing improvement would be societal welfare,
equating to maximizing the number of healthy life years over the
long-term. Roughly, this boils down to access, innovation and cost: it
being desirable to have more access,[^1] more innovation and lower cost.

Remuneration rights provide increased access compared to patents.
Generic competition would lower drug prices, while tying remuneration to
health impact would increase the number of drugs available to poorer
populations and incentivize distribution.

Remuneration rights offer the same or increased levels of innovation.
Remuneration rights offer the same level and type of financial
incentives as patents. Innovation might also become more effective by
remunerating according to health impact rather than sale volume and
allowing open access to information.

Finally the cost of the remuneration rights system for medicines would
be the same or lower than our current patent-based system. The cost of
the system is made of three parts: paying for innovation, paying for
manufacture and paying for administration (e.g. the patent office etc).
By far the largest of these is the expenditure on innovation and
manufacture of medicines. Under remuneration rights these would be at a
similar level to today. Administration costs would also be similar to
today as remuneration rights reuse existing systems for granting and
administering rights.

  I. Introduction: Our access to medicines is broken -- and we can fix it
=================


Pharmaceutical research and development has delivered some of the
greatest achievements of the modern age, all but eradicating scourges
that have terrorized humanity for generations and improving the health
and quality of life of billions. But it is increasingly clear that the
system by which we finance this progress is broken. Around the world
millions lack access to the medicines they need to survive and thrive.
Often, drugs are just too expensive, while in many areas of urgent need
there are simply no medicines available to help.

The problem is global. In less affluent countries, where many pay out of
pocket for medication, prices for even a short course of treatment can
run to many times the average annual salary. In more developed nations,
public healthcare systems struggle to afford soaring drug prices, having
to ration or restrict access to the latest treatments.

These failures in access are a natural consequence of how we fund and
incentivize medical innovation. Today, innovators are awarded a monopoly
right on their inventions, a patent, which affords them exclusive
marketing rights over the resulting product. As the research and
development of new drugs is an extraordinarily expensive endeavor, the
final prices innovators set on drugs are often very high in order to
recoup costs, even though the actual drug itself may be relatively cheap
to produce. As innovators are only paid through the final sale of the
drug, prices must be high to cover these research costs. Necessarily,
these high prices limit the number of people able to access the drug.

This system also skews what kinds of innovation we receive. Medicines
which sell are incentivized rather than those with the most beneficial
impacts on health. The closing off of vital research and information
also slows down research progress. Therapies targeting chronic
conditions for the wealthy have far greater potential for profit than
those for acute conditions and for the global poor, and are invested in
accordingly. Anti-aging products of limited health impact receive much
more funding than debilitating and life-threatening conditions that
impact billions.

Under the patent system - where innovators are only rewarded through the
final sale of their product - access and innovation necessarily
conflict; if we wish to develop any new medicines tomorrow then we must,
reluctantly, restrict access today.

It is tempting, especially with increasingly strict protections on
intellectual property rights worldwide, to view this scenario as an
unfortunate inevitability. But there are ways to resolve the tension
between access and innovation. Separating the funding of research and
development from the sale prices of drugs would enable both access and
innovation to flourish. We urgently need to seize this opportunity if we
are to avoid the collapse of pharmaceutical innovation and healthcare as
we know it.

The patent system, fitting in with a wider culture of intellectual
property protection worldwide, has been so successful and dominant that
it is easy to forget the instances where medical innovation has thrived
without such protections. Opening up the products of research and
development for wider use does not necessarily entail unsustainability
and first copies going unpaid for. Even today, approximately half of all
medical R&D in the United States is funded directly by the government.
The histories of pharmaceutical development in India, Argentina and
Italy, which did not always afford patent protection, illustrate that
private sector innovation does happen without IP. It is possible to have
both access and innovation, we just need to reconceptualize how
pharmaceutical research and development is structured.

This paper makes a concerted effort to do that. Here, we make the case
for urgently reforming the current system of medical innovation,
highlighting how such a system is unsustainable and undesirable in the
long term. We propose a new system, one which rewards medical innovation
and access separately. This system, based on a remuneration right
similar to a patent, rewards medical innovators whilst allowing free and
open access to innovations so they can be produced at cost by
manufacturers and other innovators can build upon their ideas.

We demonstrate that such a system is politically and technically
feasible, and, most importantly, immensely desirable: it will expand
access to medicines for millions in both developed and developing
countries and help align innovation efforts more closely with actual
health impact.

We show that many of the necessary precursors of such a system are
already in place, and that the costs of implementation would be
significantly outweighed by the benefits in improved access and
innovation.

Ultimately, and in spite of its historical successes, the current system
of medical innovation does not work. It necessarily limits access to
essential medicines and, in many cases, fails to incentivize the kinds
of development we want as a society. The unsustainable trajectory of
this system means it is imperative to search for new mechanisms of
funding medical innovation, moving beyond the ingrained trade-off
between access and innovation a monopoly rights patent system engenders.

Remuneration rights do just this, and by dividing payment for drug
access and drug innovation, we can refocus our medical priorities and
greatly expand access at the same time. This is a huge opportunity; we
can have **both** access and innovation at the same time and all we need
to do is innovate in how how we pay for medicines. Under such a system,
everybody wins.


II. Is there a need for change? Does our current system really need fixing?
==========================================================================

Pharmaceutical research and development (R&D) has delivered some of the
greatest achievements of the modern age: the polio vaccine,
antiretroviral drugs to combat HIV, and insulin. But the system for
funding R&D is broken, and heading for catastrophe. Millions of people
do not have access to medicines because of the high prices charged to
recoup the costs of research, and many urgent health problems go without
treatments because of the lack of a profitable market. Simultaneously,
profitable but insignificant areas are over-invested in. Moreover, there
are structural blockers in the form of legal disputes and licensing
restrictions which hinder innovation and delay us receiving the most
cutting edge of medical innovation. If current trends in prices and
innovation continue, these problems will worsen over coming years and
become untenable. It is therefore essential that we find solutions to
them now.

2.1 The trajectory of the current system is unsustainable
---------------------------------------------------------

Rising prices combined with an aging population, demographic growth and
falling therapeutic benefit make for an unsustainable system. The past
decades have seen an increase in the price of medicines, and a decrease
in the therapeutic benefits associated with new innovations.[^2]
Projections suggest these trends will continue. It is therefore
imperative to take action before the price of healthcare becomes
completely unsustainable, and the number of new and universal medicines
dwindles. Governments will not be able to afford to buy medicines for
their citizens at this rate.[^3] Such an outcome would not only spell
disaster for state budgets and ordinary citizens, but also for
pharmaceutical companies' profits. Bankrupted healthcare providers will
no longer be able to purchase from pharmaceutical companies if prices
rise indefinitely. Everyone has a stake in changing the system to
preserve both rewards for innovation and access to medicines.

The prices of medicines are eye-watering. According to the Express
Scripts Prescription Price Index, branded drug prices doubled between
2008 and 2016.[^4] As the Kaiser Family Foundation has demonstrated,
using data from the National Health Expenditure Account, United States
(US) spending on prescription drugs has been on a steep incline for
decades, even when adjusted for inflation (Figure 1). In 1980, \$30
billion was spent, adjusting for inflation; in 2016 this figure soared
to \$329 billion - an increase of over 1000%. Recent years have seen
particularly steep increases, with expenditure in 2015 at 120% of that
just two years previously in 2013.[^5] In 2017 alone, pharmaceutical
company Pfizer raised the price of 91 of its drugs by an average of
20%.[^6] Such price hikes are now threatening access in even the richest
of countries.

### Figure 1: US prescription drug spending is rising rapidly

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure1.png"/>

Source: "Health Spending Explorer." Peterson-Kaiser Health System
Tracker (blog). Accessed October 25, 2017.
https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/interactive/.

As well as getting more expensive, drugs are also getting less
effective. Figure 2 shows the results of the annual review of new
products and new indications for drugs already on the market undertaken
by Prescrire International. Just 16% of new drugs in 2016 had even a
possible advantage over their predecessors, compared with 42% in 1992.
The absolute number of drugs with possible therapeutic advantage has
also fallen, from 60 new drugs in 1992 to just 15 in 2016. Meanwhile, in
the same time period the percentage of drugs offering no additional
therapeutic benefit rose from 53% to 78%. If such trends continue, we
will not only face unsustainably high drug prices in the future but also
a grave shortage of effective drugs.

### Figure 2: Therapeutic benefit is declining implying declining value for money

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure2.png"/>

Sources: "A Look Back at Pharmaceuticals in 2006: Aggressive Advertising Cannot Hide the Absence of Therapeutic Advances", p. 84; "New Products
and New Indications in 2016: A System That Favours Imitation over the
Pursuit of Real Progress", p. 138.

2.2 Millions of people cannot get the treatment they need because of high prices
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Millions of people today do not have access to the medicines they need.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that around a third of the
world's population does not have access to medicines.[^7] There are many
reasons for a lack of access to medicines: availability, affordability,
appropriate use, and drug quality.[^8] Affordability, a combination of
price, cost and availability of funds, is a primary concern.[^9] This
particularly affects the poor and those living in poorer countries. In
wealthier countries, governments have also become unable to meet the
rising costs of new medicines. Consequently, millions of people go
without treatment or experience delays in doing so. This has obvious
costs to the individual, but also serves to place additional strain on
public healthcare systems and reduces economic productivity.

While it is difficult to find estimates on the lack of drug access
globally, there are numerous cases that illustrate the low levels of
access to medicines today. The WHO estimate that in 2008, 8.8m children
died from vaccine-preventable illnesses.[^10] In 2017, the WHO claimed
that 1.5 million deaths could be prevented annually if vaccination
coverage improved.[^11] Figure 3 shows access figures for three
high-burden diseases: Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), hepatitis C
and tuberculosis (TB). The numbers of people who currently go untreated
for these diseases is staggering: 16 million with HIV,[^12] 66 million
with Hepatitis C, [^13] and 4.1 million with TB.[^14] It is unclear
exactly how many of these people would be able to receive treatment at
close to marginal cost, but even with very conservative assumptions, it
is clear that many millions are unable to access medicines because of
unaffordably high drug prices. This is especially important given the
threat to global health security posed by conditions like HIV and
multiple drug-resistant TB. Everyone benefits from increased access to
medical treatment, not just the poor or the sick.

### Figure 3: Access to treatment for HIV, Hepatitis C and TB show that millions lack access to medicines

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure3.png"/>

Sources: "GHO \| By Category \| Antiretroviral Therapy Coverage - Data
and Estimates by Country." WHO. Accessed October 25, 2017.
[http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.626](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.626); "GHO \| By Category \| Treatment
Coverage - Data by WHO Region." WHO. Accessed October 31, 2017.
[http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.57056ALL?lang=en](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.57056ALL?lang=en)];"Global Hepatitis Report, 2017." World Health Organisation, 2017. [http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/255016/1/9789241565455-eng.pdf?ua=1](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/255016/1/9789241565455-eng.pdf?ua=1); "WHO \| Hepatitis C." WHO. Accessed October 25, 2017. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs164/en/.

These systemic and persistent failures inaccess are directly caused by
the patent system. Patented medicines are produced exclusively and
without market competition, consequently being sold at prices far above
the costs of manufacture. Figure 7 in Section 6.2 gives examples of the
huge gap that is often present between the cost of manufacture and the
sale price of a medicine. This gap exists to compensate for high R&D
costs. Under the patent system, such high prices are not just likely:
they are necessary. The way that the patent system funds innovation,
which we need if we are to continue to have new medicines developed, is
through high prices today, restricting access for those who are sick in
the here and now.

2.3 Innovation is inefficient: money for R&D is poorly allocated, we are not getting new drugs for the illnesses we face
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In spite of the incentives for innovation generated by patents, there
are a number of serious problems with the way in which innovation
operates today. A critical role of the pharmaceutical industry is to
create new medicines which benefit society, but equally vital is to make
these products available to those who need them. The current patent
system is not achieving this requirement. Because financial incentives
for innovation are tied to the market, unprofitable but important areas
of health are neglected; simultaneously, profitable but relatively
insignificant areas in terms of health impact are heavily invested in.
Finally, there are structural blockers to research , such as patent
disputes and licensing which unnecessarily delay and complicate the
development of new medicines.

### 2.3.1 Many diseases that affect a lot of people are neglected under the current system

Ultimately, the reason that pharmaceutical innovation matters is for
people to be healthy. Pharmaceutical companies are motivated by this
philosophy, but they also have a responsibility to their shareholders.
Yet profitability is a poor proxy for health, especially given wealth
inequalities. Many of the most widespread and serious diseases primarily
affect the poor (e.g. malaria). As the people who suffer from these
diseases cannot afford to pay large amounts for medicines, the market
does not provide a sufficient incentive for pharmaceutical companies to
conduct the necessary R&D. A similar effect can be observed with chronic
and acute diseases: as those with chronic illnesses continue to need
medication, it is more profitable to invest in research for chronic
needs than acute but serious illnesses. This means that important areas
of health are systematically neglected in the R&D pipeline.

Neglected diseases include malaria, TB, diarrheal diseases, and tropical
diseases; they are defined as diseases that affect people in low-income
countries and are a leading cause of mortality, chronic disability and
poverty. Over a billion people live with one or more neglected tropical
disease.[^15] In 2010, *"Only about 1% of all health R&D investments
were allocated to neglected diseases."*[^16] And *"in 2013, public
and private investment for R&D in 34 neglected diseases was \$3.2
billion, of which pharmaceutical corporations only contributed \$401
million. The latter amount represents only 0.8% of total industrial R&D
spending of \$51.2 billion in 2014"*.[^17] The global landscape of
health R&D shows a substantial gap: diseases of relevance to high-income
countries were investigated in clinical trials seven-to-eight-times more
often than were diseases whose burden lies mainly in low-income and
middle-income countries.[^18] Monopoly patents do not offer a sufficient
incentive to innovate in these areas, because the people affected by
these diseases are mostly poor. In a system where profit is tied to
sales, drugs to treat these patients will not be developed. This has a
huge human cost for those who suffer from such diseases, and also poses
risks to the world at large. Unchecked tropical diseases increase the
risk of global pandemics like ebola, while entrenching poverty and so
increasing global instability. It is better for human society if leading
causes of mortality and morbidity are treated.

### 2.3.2 Disproportionate resources are spent on areas of limited health impact

On the other hand, profitability does incentivize areas of research
which have low health impact, or in some instances no health impact at
all. The profit incentive is insensitive to how large a therapeutic
benefit a treatment will have. Provided that a sufficiently large or
sufficiently wealthy market exists, there are incentives for R&D. This
leads to areas of low therapeutic significance being over-researched - a
poor allocation of resources from the point of view of social welfare.

It has been estimated that much of the neglected tropical disease
burden, which impacts 1.4 billion people in South Asia and Sub-Saharan
Africa, could be alleviated for just \$300 million to \$400 million a
year.[^19] However, the current mechanisms for rewarding medical
innovation simply do not provide avenues for the return on investment
for this kind of research.[^20] It simply does not happen, or does so in
a much diminished capacity, often requiring state or philanthropic
support. In fact, much more money is spent each year on the cosmetic
anti-ageing market: the global anti-aging market was valued at \$140.3
billion in 2015,[^21] in spite of the limited health impact it
generates.

Provided a drug can be sold legally and to a sufficient extent, it is
profitable to make, even if it does not represent any real improvement
on existing drugs.[^22] In 2005, Love and Hubbard claimed that
*"probably one-half to two-thirds of the R&D investments were directed
towards projects of almost no medical significance"*.[^23] And *"an
analysis of 1345 new medicine approvals in Europe revealed that no real
breakthroughs occurred between 2000 and 2014; only 9% of new medicines
offered an advance, and 20% were possibly helpful"*.[^24]

### 2.3.3 Research is slowed by legal disputes and licensing restrictions

Alongside these problems of allocation, there are also structural
blockers to research of all kinds under the patent system. Patents are a
monopoly rights and are explicitly designed to limit anyone other than
the innovator from using the information or accessing the knowledge
behind an innovation. Those who do not follow these rules are harshly
penalized. As a result, costly management and infringement settlements
are pervasive.[^25]

Legal disputes can stall innovation for many years, preventing new
medicines from reaching the public. Historical examples include the
telephone, the radio and the automobile.[^26] Moreover, failure to
obtain a license from a patent holder means that potential innovators
cannot proceed. A good example of this is the monopoly over breast
cancer genes formerly held by Myriad Genetics. Until the patent was
revoked, further research and more widely available and affordable
testing were stalled.[^27] In contrast, the opening up of intellectual
property has proven to be effective boosters for innovation. In the
aftermath of the First World War, compulsory licensing of German
chemical patents in the US significantly improved innovation there.[^28]
This indicates that patent enforcement can slow down R&D.

2.4 The patent system produces the tension between access and innovation
------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are good reasons we use patents: they provide effective incentives
for innovation, ensuring that innovators are rewarded. Simply voiding
patents, as some people have argued, is unlikely to be a viable solution
either practically or politically. If patents were simply to disappear
private investors would be left with little incentive to undertake
expensive R&D at all, and future generations would see a deficit of new
medicines.

Unfortunately, the patent system also creates a fundamental tension
between access and innovation. More access means less innovation and
vice-versa. With patents, high prices are needed to fund innovation but
high prices mean fewer people can be treated (crucially, the lost
purchases of those who cannot afford treatment benefit no-one as the
patients remain sick and the pharmaceutical company gains no revenue).
Conversely, lowering prices for medicines to increase the number of
patients with access would mean less money for pharmaceutical companies
to invest in innovation.

As a society we obviously want both access and innovation. At an
extreme, one is practically worthless without the other: imagine a world
in which everyone has access to what medicines there are, but there are
virtually none available; conversely, imagine a world in which all
diseases have a cure but no one can afford them. The patent system
trades these two things off against one another. Without systemic
change, there is no way around this fundamental dilemma: either one
increases access and decreases innovation, or one increases innovation
and decreases access.

Given the ubiquity of the patent system, and a broader culture of
protecting intellectual property[^29] this trade-off can seem natural or
inherent. However, the trade off is merely an artefact created by the
nature of patents as a funding mechanism. Medicine is made up of two
parts: information and manufacture. The information part of medicine is
intangible, produced through R&D, and extremely expensive. The
manufactured part of medicine is physical, produced in factories and
relatively cheap to make. Patents create a single payment for these two
elements of medicine: both R&D and the manufactured pill are paid for by
the consumer, be they a government, an insurer or an individual patient.
Because patents combine the payments for these two elements, the cost
per usage of a given treatment must be high to cover the R&D. This means
that the number of treatments that can be afforded by a given healthcare
consumer is limited, and many are denied access as shown in Section 2.2.
And this denial of access is necessary under the patent system:
otherwise R&D will not be incentivized in future.

But it is possible to pay for R&D and manufacture separately, thus
resolving the conflict. By splitting the single payment of the patent
mechanism into two, the price of each individual unit of a medicine can
be drastically lowered, while maintaining high incentives for
innovation.

We need a new approach at this critical juncture. A point where millions
are unable to afford access to essential medicines and where even in the
richest countries soaring prices are leading to rationing and a crisis
in funding. We need a two-part payment system that pays separately for
innovation and manufacturing medicines delivering both high levels of
investment in innovation and high levels of access to affordable
medicines. Remuneration rights do just this

III. Is there an alternative to the patent system?
================================================

We propose an alternative kind of property rights,[^30] remuneration
rights, as the best alternative to the patent system for medical
innovation. Under remuneration rights, innovators would obtain a
non-monopolistic *"remuneration right"* rather than the monopoly patent
they receive today. Remuneration rights entitle their owner to payment
from a central fund according to the value generated by the innovation:
how much a given drug improved health. In return, the innovation would
be open for use and manufacture by everyone, improving access and
further facilitating innovation.

3.1 The remuneration rights two-part payment model
--------------------------------------------------

Figure 4 depicts the core aspects of the remuneration rights model.
Pharmaceutical companies and other innovators undertake R&D and create
new medicines. Innovators register for a remuneration right instead of a
patent. In exchange for a remuneration right, all R&D has to be freely
available to any certified manufacturers to produce. This enables
competition among manufacturers to make high quality, cheap medicines.
Healthcare buyers purchase these medicines at prices close to the cost
of manufacture. Lower prices per pill dramatically increases patient
access to medicines. Meanwhile, citizens continue to pay taxes to their
governments. Governments pass a small proportion of their health care
budget to health care buyers to purchase medicines. A much larger
proportion is paid into an independent remuneration rights fund. This
fund disburses its funds on an annual basis to the owners of registered
innovations. Each innovation is rewarded in proportion to the health
impact it produced.

### Figure 4: The remuneration rights model makes two payments: one for innovation and one for manufacture

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure4.png"/>

Crucially, under the remuneration rights system, medicines and R&D are
paid for separately. Currently when we pay for a medicine we are paying
both for the expensive R&D (perhaps billions in total) and for the cheap
cost of manufacturing (perhaps just a few dollars per pill). As an
example, when we pay \$50,000 for a medicine perhaps 99% (\$49,500) is
going to pay for the R&D and 1% (\$500) is paying for the manufacturing.

With remuneration rights, the billions of R&D cost are paid for via the
remuneration rights fund, and the hundreds of dollars to manufacture the
medicines are paid through current channels of drug purchasing. Because
the price of medicines is close to the cost of manufacture, people can
get the treatment they need. Meanwhile, innovation is still paid for and
incentivized through the remuneration rights fund.

### Figure 5: The distribution of medicines and monies under the remuneration rights system

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure5.png"/>

Figure 5 shows how medicines and monies would flow under the
remuneration rights system, using the example of a simplified world with
two cancer drugs. Patients in this example (all insurees/taxpayers
normally) would contribute to the remuneration rights fund, which would
disburse money to innovators to pay for R&D (the two richer patients in
the diagram with \$\$). Competition in manufacturing would mean the
medicines would then be available to all patients and monies from the
fund would be distributed to the relevant innovators proportionately to
use and impact (in this case we assume the benefit of each treatment is
the same and so the monies are distributed to the manufacturers 50:50).
In this case the ultimate distribution of monies to innovators is
exactly the same under remuneration rights as under patents but in
contrast to the patents case all three patients receive treatment.
(Note, for simplicity we have omitted manufacturers from this diagram as
we are seeking to illustrate the distribution of monies to innovators).

3.2 How do remuneration rights work?
------------------------------------

### 3.2.1 Taxpayers, employers and insurers contribute healthcare payments as today

We already have substantial sources of funding for medicines in the form
of healthcare budgets, divided amongst direct grant giving and indirect
funding through drug purchases. This funding comes from taxpayers,
employers and insurers. Under a remuneration rights system, these groups
would continue to contribute healthcare payments as today. In
government-based health systems, this money would come primarily
directly from taxpayers and employers. In insurance-based health
systems, much of this money would be paid first in insurance
contributions, and then transferred on by insurance companies.

### 3.2.2 Governments pool these existing payments into an independant fund

Governments would pool existing contributions into an independent
remuneration rights fund. There are a number of ways the level of
funding might be determined. One way would be to set a percentage of GDP
for each participating government to contribute. Another would be to set
the size of the fund at the current level of private spending on
pharmaceutical R&D, and grow the fund at the current level of growth in
private research spending. The fund would have a fixed disbursable pool
available for innovation funding each year. Governments would be legally
bound to fulfil their respective contributions. Once governments had
deposited their funds, they would no longer have control over the
allocation of the monies, ensuring the independence of the fund.

### 3.2.3 Innovators receive a remuneration right entitling them to a payment from the fund reflecting the health impact of their innovation

Innovators would apply for a remuneration right from a remuneration
right office, similar to patent offices today. This right would not
grant market exclusivity, and would enjoin open access to the
information behind the innovation. Instead this right would entitle
innovators to be paid from remuneration rights fund based on the impact
of their innovation on health.

Specifically, each year, the disbursable funds in the remuneration
rights fund would be divided up among the holders of remuneration
rights, in proportion to the health impact they created. Where
innovators build upon the ideas of others, a portion of their
remuneration right would be set aside like a royalty, to be delivered up
to the originators of the relevant innovations. Health impact would be
estimated using a predetermined and transparent metric. There are
several examples of these metrics today, like the Quality-Adjusted Life
Year (QALY) or Disability-Adjusted Life Year (DALY), which are used by
institutions like the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) and the WHO.

In this way, remuneration rights have a strong market-like aspect:
payment is determined by individual usage and its benefits. In some
respects they are similar to patents, but without the disadvantage of
creating monopolies. And just as patents have a limited term,
remuneration rights would eventually expire. This would ensure that
money continued to flow towards newly invented treatments, and would
reduce the need to keep track of the impact of older treatments, which
might be infrequently used or simply superseded.

### 3.2.4 Patients receive medicines in the same way as today, but at prices close to the cost of manufacture so we can greatly expand access to treatment compared to today

Access would increase dramatically at no cost to innovation and with
little or no increase in spending. Citizens would pay their tax (or
insurance contributions in insurance based systems) just like today.
There might be small additional cost of additional manufacturing as
lower prices mean we choose to expand access. The overall result is
vastly increased access to medicines for patients.

The way in which patients receive medication would remain the same - but
the price to themselves, their insurers or their health system would
fall per treatment. Given that millions of people currently do not have
access to essential medicines, this could mean a huge increase in health
outcomes for a small additional investment.[^31]


=

IV. What is the impact on stakeholders?
======================================

There are many important groups involved in the funding, research,
development, manufacture, distribution and use of medicines.
Remuneration rights would change the experience of some groups operate,
while leaving that of others little changed. This section sets out in
detail the implications of the remuneration rights system for some of
the most important stakeholders in the medical ecosystem.

4.1 Patients would benefit from greatly expanded access to medicines and more innovation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Patients receive medicines in the same way as today, but more
treatments are available to them at much cheaper prices.**

Patients would continue to use prescription medicines paid for by the
parties currently responsible, be they government, insurance companies
or patients themselves. What would change for patients under
remuneration rights is that more treatments would be available.
Currently, expensive treatments are rationed or not provided at all in
many countries. Separating the cost of the medicines themselves from the
cost of the R&D would mean that each additional treatment, rather than
costing hundreds of thousands of dollars, might cost hundreds or even
less.

4.2 Healthcare professionals would have more freedom to treat as needed rather than as affordable
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Healthcare professionals continue to prescribe as today, but with
access to greater treatment volumes.**

Doctors, pharmacists and other healthcare professionals would continue
to prescribe medicines as they do today. However, they would have access
to many drugs which are currently too expensive to prescribe at all, or
in all but the most serious cases.

4.3 Healthcare buyers would have more freedom to treat as needed rather than as affordable
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Healthcare buyers can purchase medicines from a greater range of
manufacturers at greatly reduced prices.**

Healthcare buyers would be able to choose between a wide range of
manufacturers when purchasing medicines. This would give them greater
power to negotiate prices, which in any case would be driven far lower
than today thanks to competition in manufacture.

4.4 Civil servants would have more transparency and information to implement healthcare programs with objectivity and efficiency
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Civil servants implement the fund according to predetermined,
predictable and objective guidelines.**

Civil servants would implement the transition to the remuneration rights
model, and would then operate the fund itself. This would be a
significant task for countries participating in the remuneration rights
fund. The nature of remunerating innovations based on health impact is
more technical than discretionary, which enables transparency and
predetermination of selection criteria.

4.5 Politicians would have a win-win: the power to deliver far more healthcare for a similar budget
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Politicians can deliver much greater health care and remain
independent of decisions about health impact.**

Politicians would be able to deliver greater health care for only a
comparatively trivial increase in funding (to cover the low cost of
manufacture for additional physical medicines). Meanwhile, they would
remain independent of decisions about health impact, allowing these
decisions to be made without undue political influence and sparing
politicians hard decisions between treatment types.

4.6 Employers would be able to offer greater treatment to employees
-------------------------------------------------------------------

**Employers pay health care contributions as today, and their employees
can access much greater levels of treatment for similar cost.**

Employers would continue to pay insurance contributions for their
employees, either at the same or a very slightly increased rate (to
cover the low cost of manufacture for additional physical medicines).
Their employees would receive far greater levels of access to medicines
in exchange for this similar input. This can be expected to increase
productivity , minimize sick days, and boost employee wellbeing.

4.7 Insurance companies would have greater certainty and control of costs and could focus their spend on increasing treatment levels (for the same cost)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Insurance companies pay into the fund, and their insurees can access
much greater levels of treatment for similar cost.**

Insurance companies would pay contributions into the fund. Their
insurees would receive far greater levels of access to medicines.
Meanwhile, insurers would benefit from the vastly reduced price of
medicines. Overall, insurers would pay slightly more (to cover the cost
of manufacture for additional pills) for greatly increased health
coverage.

4.8 Taxpayers would get more effective healthcare and more treatment for their taxes
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Taxpayers would continue to contribute to national health budgets. The
slightly increased expenses of the system (in paying for the manufacture
for many more pills) would mean slightly more money spent on healthcare
(though this could potentially be offset by efficiency gains). In
exchange, taxpayers would benefit from drastically increased access to
medicines.

4.9 Pharmaceutical shareholders continue to receive profits and gain increased certainty and reduce reputational risk
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Shareholders continue to receive profits from pharmaceutical
companies.**

Pharmaceutical companies would remain profitable businesses, but their
profits would be tied to health impact rather than to pure sales.
Shareholders would still receive these profits. Furthermore, the
structure of the remuneration rights fund would deliver greater
certainty to investors about the long-term revenues available to the
industry.

4.10 Marketers could shift focus onto total health impact rather than chase sectors with disposable income
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Marketers continue to market drugs. Marketing undertaken by
manufacturers feeds into profits for the owners of the remuneration
right.**

There would still be a need to market drugs. Although profits would no
longer be tied directly to sales, as health impact is related to the
number of patients treated, there would be an incentive to market
effectively. Competing manufacturers would use marketing to increase
their market share. Ultimately, innovators would benefit from marketing
undertaken by manufacturers: it would increase the use and therefore the
health impact of their innovation, and so lead to a greater payment from
the remuneration rights fund.

4.11 Distributors will be rewarded for expanding towards emerging and more marginal markets
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Distributors have an expanded remit, as rewarding innovation based on
health impact provides a financial incentive to distribute to
hard-to-reach patients.**

Distributors of pharmaceuticals would experience vastly increased
incentives to reach more marginal patients. Currently there is only an
incentive to distribute to wealthy markets, as remuneration is based on
sale price alone. Under the remuneration rights system, as remuneration
is tied instead to health impact, there is a stronger incentive to
distribute to poor markets too.[^32] This would encourage distributors
to expand into emerging markets, as well as increasing global access to
medicines.

4.12 Manufacturers will be free to produce and compete for any registered innovation
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Qualified manufacturers can produce any medicine in competition with
other manufacturers.**

Manufacturers would have license and royalty free access to any
innovation registered with the remuneration rights office. This would
expand the opportunities for manufacturers whilst ensuring high quality
production at competitive prices. Manufacturers would still be subject
to extensive quality control, so drug quality would be maintained.

4.13 Innovators will be remunerated from the fund for their registered innovations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Innovators file for remuneration rights instead of patents and are
paid annually from the fund.**

As producers of information, innovators would file for a remuneration
right. They would then be entitled to a share of the remuneration rights
funding pool for a fixed period of time. Payments would be made
annually. The payments to the rights holder would be proportional to the
usage and health benefits of the treatment.

As consumers of information, innovators would have unrestricted access
to research and information on all innovations registered with the
remuneration rights office. This would reduce duplication and accelerate
cumulative research.

4.14 Investors' returns will shift to R&D which produces the most health benefits
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Investors get returns from R&D that delivers health impact.**

Investors continue to receive returns on investments in pharmaceutical
R&D. The only difference is that the most successful investments would
be in the innovations which produce the most health benefit, rather than
in the innovations which sell best.

4.15 Basic researchers still rely on the existing research grant system, as today
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Basic researchers continue to be funded through research grants.**

Basic researchers would still be funded through research grants, as
today. Grants are a push funding mechanism, and fund research upfront,
rather than after the fact.[^33] This is the most suitable way to fund
early stage research, as it permits exploratory work into new research
areas, without predetermining specific outcomes.[^34]

V. Are remuneration rights feasible?
====================================

In order to represent a viable alternative to the patent system,
remuneration rights must be technically and politically feasible to
implement. Technically, many of the aspects required under a
remuneration rights system already exist; we already have robust means
of measuring health impact, the patent system requires ways of defining
innovation ownership as well as what happens when patented innovations
are built upon by others. Each of these mechanisms could be reused for
remuneration rights.

Furthermore, much of the political infrastructure required for a
remuneration rights system is already in place, including coherent
international (and often national) legislation and means of arbitration
that could be co-opted, similar governing bodies for related funds, and
the means of securing sustainable funding. This means there are few
significant barriers to a transition to a remuneration rights system.

5.1 Remuneration rights are technically feasible
------------------------------------------------

For remuneration rights to be a viable funding mechanism, the technical
aspects of the model must be practicable. Three issues stand out:

-   **Delimitability**. Remuneration rights require the determination of
     which innovation belongs to which innovator.

-   **Reuse.** As research is cumulative, it is important that the
     remuneration rights model can reward innovators who build on the
     work of others in a proportionate manner, while not disadvantaging
     the originator.

-   **Health impact measurement.** Health impact must be measurable in a
     reasonably accurate way for remuneration rights to be allocated
     appropriately.

Fortunately, there are precedents for all three of these technical
features.

### 5.1.1 We already determine who owns innovations

It is crucial to both the patent and the remuneration rights system that
innovations can be separated from one another. In order to give a right,
whether a patent monopoly right or a remuneration right, to an
individual, we have to be able to attribute innovation correctly. This
process is vital in the patent system, could be substantially
reappropriated under a remuneration rights system.

Because it aims to confer special privilege over a particular
innovation, the question of delimitation is central to the patent system
and therefore well defined within that framework. When submitting a
patent application, the goal for the innovator is to demonstrate that
the product (or treatment) represents a significant innovation
originating from the applicant. The application process is itself a
delimitation exercise which defines the innovation.

Remuneration rights cover the same sorts of innovation patents do, and
would be delimitable in the same way. To qualify for a remuneration
right, innovators would have to prove that they were the originators of
a particular medicine or treatment in the same way they currently do
when applying for patents. The infrastructure of the current system can
to a large extent be maintained: the patent office would simply become
the remuneration rights office. Aside from the end product, very little
would change.

### 5.1.2 We already share rights between multiple innovators

Remuneration rights would be granted on the condition of completely open
access to all information relating to the innovation. This would enable
innovators to build on previous ideas more easily. It is therefore
important that remuneration can be shared fairly between originators and
innovators who build upon these.

This already happens in the patent system, albeit to a more limited
degree. Because research is cumulative, reuse is frequent and important
in medicine, although it is inhibited by the blockers discussed in
Section 2.3.3. Under the patent system, follow-on innovators are
required to pay royalties to the original innovator.

Within the remuneration rights model, anyone would be free to build on
the work of others. In a similar fashion to royalties in the patent
system, follow-on innovators would be liable to pay a proportion of
their own remuneration rights payments to those whose work they built
upon. These proportions might be standardized for simple cases or, for
more complex cases, the two parties could negotiate, with ultimate
recourse to the courts if no mutually acceptable solution were found. In
other words, if an innovation built upon a previous innovation holding a
remuneration right, then a proportion of the right granted to the
secondary innovation would be set aside for the initial innovator(s).

The major difference with the patent system would be that the original
innovator would not have an absolute right to prohibit reuse as they do
today. Rather, they would have the right only to *\"equitable
remuneration\"*. This change would favor the follow-on innovator, while
ensuring that the originator was fairly compensated. The remuneration
rights model would therefore make it easier for innovators to build on
and incorporate previous work, preventing the delays seen today.[^35]
The system would operate along the same lines as the patent system
today, but without the right to prohibit reuse.

### 5.1.3 We already measure health impact

Remuneration rights depend on the measurability of health impact. While
any measurements would be inexact, there are several good measurement
systems which could be deployed, some of which are already in use
today.[^36] Some jurisdictions already use these to determine their
medicine purchases: for example, NICE in the United Kingdom (UK) uses
QALYs to decide whether or not a medicine is cost-effective.[^37] The
remuneration rights fund would extend the methods and data gathering
procedures that already exist, creating a rich pool of information for
improving healthcare in general while simultaneously rewarding
innovation more fairly.

There are several sources of data that would be used to assess the
health impact of a particular innovation. Initially, clinical trial data
would be used as a baseline for the efficacy and therapeutic benefit of
a drug. Today clinical trials showing safety and efficacy are already
required for all new pharmaceuticals so this data is already being
collected. As time passed, observational data would become available on
the actual benefits caused by the medicine. Additionally, we also
already track prescribing data so that the number of treatments given
out can be calculated.[^38]

No health impact assessment will be perfect. Data will be incomplete,
and some things will be difficult or controversial to quantify. But
health impact assessment need only be accurate enough that the best
strategy for companies seeking remuneration rights is to actually
produce health benefits.[^39] Moreover, because companies are competing
for a fixed amount in the Remuneration Rights Fund for Medicines they
have an incentive to hold each other account and check fraud and abuse
(if company X fraudulently overstates the use and health impact of their
treatment this reduces the monies for competing company Y).

5.2 Remuneration rights are politically feasible
------------------------------------------------

As well as functioning technically, remuneration rights must be able to
operate politically. This includes the sustainable financing of the
fund, the fund's governance structure, the relationship between the fund
and governments, and the legal status of the fund.

### 5.2.1 Sustainable funding can be ensured

For the fund to function reliably on a global scale, two essential
conditions must be met: international agreements binding all countries
to contribute to the fund, and a systematic way to set equitable
contribution levels must be agreed upon.

Before pooling contributions into an independent remuneration rights
fund, it is essential to prevent potential free riders from benefiting
from the efforts produced under the remuneration right model, both
within and between countries, without contributing to the fund
themselves. A remuneration rights fund without such safeguards against
freeriding would be unsustainable. This could be done by establishing
international agreements under which countries bind themselves to
minimum levels of medical research funding, as happens with military
spending. Governments would be legally bound to fulfil their respective
contributions, which would ensure the fund would have a fixed
disbursable pool each year. Once contributions were deposited,
governments would no longer have control over the allocation of the
monies.

The size the fund of could be determined in two different ways. First,
it could be benchmarked on the the current level of private spending on
pharmaceutical R&D, and grow at the current level of growth in private
research spending. In the US, for instance, current levels of public and
private research funding together amount to \$100bn a year (depending on
exactly how medical research is demarcated). Alternatively, each country
could agree to allocate a given percentage of their GDP, perhaps 0.5% to
1% of GDP, raised primarily out of general tax revenue. As an
illustration, 1% of GDP for the United States would amount to about
\$186bn a year.[^40] In time, the fund would need to be adjusted to
follow inflation and demand for healthcare. The level could also be
adjusted to reflect the level of development between countries, with
richer countries committing themselves to higher proportions.

### 5.2.2 Governance of the fund can be established

The fund would be governed by an independent body. Stakeholder
participation would be important to ensure that participating states are
willing to join the remuneration rights fund.[^41] Transparency would
also be vital, to create trust in the operating of the fund. Ultimately,
the most important feature of the governing body would be its
impartiality. One way of achieving this would be to make governance
independent of electoral politics and political faction. Another might
be to separating the performance of health impact assessment from the
establishment of guidelines for the same.[^42] This would minimize the
discretionary function of health impact assessment and reduce the risk
of external influence being exerted.

Specific governance designs have already been proposed by previous
proposals operating along similar lines to a remuneration rights
fund:[^43]

-   The Medical Innovation Prize Fund Act (MIPF), submitted most
     recently to Congress in 2017 by Bernie Sanders, proposes a
     national remuneration rights-style fund for medical research in
     the US.[^44] The system would be administered by a board of
     trustees and six expert advisory boards. There would also be a
     system of competitive intermediaries, who would compete for
     funding and allocate some of the rewards.[^45]

-   The Health Impact Fund (HIF), proposed by Aidan Hollis and Thomas
     Pogge in 2008, would be a voluntary, global remuneration rights
     fund:

 "*The HIF will be governed by a Board of Directors chosen by funding
 partners, exercising primary responsibility over the Fund. The Board
 will oversee three branches representing the core functions of the
 Fund: the Technical Branch, the Assessment Branch, and the Audit
 Branch. These will, respectively, set the standards for evaluation of
 health impact (Technical), determine individual products' actual
 impact (Assessment), and ensure correspondence between standards and
 evaluations (Audit).*"[^46]

-   A series of proposals made to the WHO between 2006 and 2012
     recommend the creation of a binding convention under the auspices
     of the WHO or another United Nations agency. A fund for medical
     innovation would be established under this body.[^47]

Such designs would need to be considered in a feasibility study. Our
proposal builds upon these previous models.[^48]

### 5.2.3 International cooperation can be achieved

The remuneration rights fund would operate in a global context, liaising
with many governments. There are questions about both cooperation
between participants of the fund and between the fund and non-members.
The most crucial point of tension in implementing and maintaining a
remuneration rights system will be how to negotiate the potential issue
of free riders, whereby non-members enjoy the benefits of open-access
without contributing towards R&D costs.

There are questions remaining as to whether the fund could operate
successfully on a national level or whether wider international
cooperation would be required. There have been proposals for national
remuneration rights-style funds like MIPF,[^49] and a pilot study might
well be national in scale. Other advocates think that a minimum viable
level of participation pertains. For instance, the proponents of HIF
regard the minimum threshold to be a fund comprising states representing
a third of global income.[^50] Whether the fund is national or
international in scope, participants would need to contribute
sufficiently to encourage innovation. To obtain the full benefits of the
fund, member states would also need to have a lively manufacturing
sector; generic competition tends not to lead to marginal cost unless
there are 10 or more competitors.[^51]

At least initially, there would likely be states operating outside of
the remuneration fund. This raises the question of non-members
exploiting the open-access nature of the fund without contributing
towards it, and of members requisitioning patented innovations
elsewhere, to manufacture internally, without compensating patent
holders. Core to governing this relationship would have to be a mutual
recognition of patents and remuneration rights. Members of the
remuneration rights fund would continue to respect the IP rights of
non-member states and alternative means of payment may need to be
developed for non-members wishing to use innovations in the fund.

International treaties, differential pricing agreements or some other
means of translating between the two systems will need to be established
to allow a successful coexistence of both systems.

### 5.2.4 National and international laws already permit remuneration rights

There is extensive national and international legislation covering the
patent system. The remuneration rights model is compatible with these
legal frameworks. The most important of these is the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), which is
compatible with the remuneration rights system.

The patent system, while still defined and enforced in national
jurisdictions, has been internationalized through the TRIPS agreement.
TRIPS governs nearly all aspects of intellectual property in
international trade. Prior to TRIPS, different countries had different
patent laws, which often reflected their level of development and the
social goals that patent laws were thought necessary to achieve. Today,
TRIPS requires all World Trade Organisation member states to maintain
strict patent protection laws for patented pharmaceuticals, with a
guarantee of at least 20 years of market exclusivity.

While the patent system enforced by TRIPS is global and binding, it also
has built-in flexibilities. Legal provisions are in place to allow
exceptions to exclusive rights in order to widen access and bypass the
patent monopoly under specific circumstances. Referred to as
"*compulsory licensing*", these flexibilities allow the use of patented
innovations without the consent of the owner in cases of (public)
non-commercial use, national emergencies, other circumstances of extreme
urgency, as well as in anticompetitive conduct. Article 30 of TRIPS
clarifies that exceptions to exclusive rights must be limited, must
"*not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent,\"*
and must *"not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third
parties"*. Provided that a remuneration rights fund where set at a
sufficiently high level, it would therefore qualify as a legitimate
exception, as it would take the interests of innovators into account
through sufficient remuneration.[^52] These flexibilities are already in
place, legal and would allow remuneration rights to function without
requiring additional legal frameworks to be created.

Other examples of TRIPS compliant (and legal), but non-patent-based,
funding mechanisms exist. Prize funds are a good example. For instance,
the Longitude Antibiotics Diagnostics Prize offers \$10m for a
diagnostic test which helps to conserve antibiotic use.[^53] Patent
pools are also used today to increase access to medicines. The Medicine
Patent Pool (funded by UNITAID) aims to reduces the cost of drugs
treating HIV, viral hepatitis C and TB by pooling the licenses required
for future development, making it it easier for innovators to create new
drugs. They negotiate directly with pharmaceutical companies to
encourage them to voluntarily join an HIV patent pool.[^54] Thus,
generic manufacturers can obtain licenses more easily, increasing
competition and reducing prices.[^55]

Overall, remuneration rights would be legally compatible with existing
international law governing intellectual property. There are also
mechanisms on a national level that would allow for disputes to be
resolved. Remuneration rights could use existing intellectual property
legislation for dispute resolution. In case of a disagreement on
remuneration allocation, parties could apply for arbitration to the
courts, similar to the patent system today.

5.3 Transitions of this scale have been successfully implemented in the past
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sections 4.1 and 4.2 have shown that a remuneration rights system would
be feasible. There is also a question of whether it would be feasible to
transition from the present patent system to a remuneration rights
model. Firstly, many aspects of the current funding system would remain
unchanged under remuneration rights, making the transition less
traumatic. Secondly, there is the option of having remuneration rights
coexist with patents, permanently or for a transition period. Finally,
transitions of this scale have happened in the past without deleterious
effects.

Many aspects of the current funding landscape for pharmaceuticals would
remain unchanged under a remuneration rights model. Figure 6 sets out
the main institutions of the remuneration rights model, with their
equivalents under the current system. First, academic-style funding for
research would continue largely unchanged. Remuneration rights would be
examined and issued much like patents and could be done by existing
patent offices. A new agency (or department, for instance, of the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)) would be established to carry out the
healthcare impact assessment that would be the basis for awarding funds.
A funding body would be established to manage the remuneration rights
funds. It should be legally and managerially independent of government
but with clear operating parameters.

### Figure 6: Many institutions are common to the remuneration rights and patent systems

  **Institution under remuneration rights**   **Equivalent in the current system**                                                    

  <img src="/img/whitepaper_figure6.png"/>           


  Grant funding from existing funders would continue as today
  Remuneration Rights Office                  Patent Office                                                                                                                                 Patent Offices would be transformed into Remuneration Rights Offices and issue remuneration rights instead of patents
  Health Impact Assessor                      HTAs such as FDA/NICE                                                                                                                         Regulators like the FDA and NICE would continue to approve drugs, and take on additional responsibility to carry out health impact assessments
  Remuneration Rights Fund                    *There are no exact equivalents of a fund today but we already operate some institutions like this such as collecting societies for music.*   The fund would be a new institution

The changes required to transition to a remuneration rights system could
also be rendered less dramatic through a coexistence with patents.
Firstly, there is a choice between replacement of prospective patents
only, and retrospective replacement. Either way, new medical discoveries
would be given remuneration rights, rather than patents, and the
question is whether existing patents would be permitted to continue
until expiry, or whether these would be converted into remunerations
rights with immediate effect. Conversion would have the advantage of
simplicity, but the remuneration rights might need to be supplemented by
compensation for the sake of fairness.[^56] If on the other hand only
future innovations were to be granted remuneration rights, then patents
and remuneration rights would operate alongside one another for a
transition period. This could be particularly appropriate as a starting
point. Feasibility could be assessed by implementing remuneration rights
on a limited basis, which would focus on either a specific area (per
country or region) or disease area and operate in parallel of the patent
system.

It could also be decided to retain patents permanently in parallel to
remuneration rights.[^57] This would give innovators the choice of
filing for either a remuneration right or a patent. In this scenario,
the remuneration rights fund would be most attractive for innovations
with high demonstrable health impact among low-income populations, where
patents offer a weak incentive, and patents would be most attractive for
innovations serving wealthier groups with lower health impact. However,
this mixed approach would substantially lower the potential benefits and
add to complexity so we generally recommend a systemic switch to
remuneration rights.

Remuneration rights could also be made more attractive, relative to
patents, in a variety of regulatory ways. A large remuneration rights
fund would mean the rewards under remuneration rights are high.
Government spending on patented drugs could be sharply limited. There
could also be direct taxes on income from patents. Full analysis of the
implications of these choices over the status of patents under the
remuneration rights system must be undertaken in a feasibility study.
But the option certainly exists to minimize the transition further by
retaining patents temporarily or permanently.

These considerations show that the transition to remuneration rights
need not be as dramatic as they first appear. But it is also true that
changes of comparable magnitude have been made before without
deleterious consequences. The foundation of the National Health Service
(NHS) in Britain and of the European Union (EU) and its predecessor
alliances are stand-out examples of structural reforms, that occured on
a larger scale, that were successful. The establishment of these
institutions required profound structural realignment, of a much wider
nature than the remuneration rights fund, and on a multinational scale
in the case of the EU. They offer reassuring precedents for the
implementation of new institutions. There is evidence that the formation
of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)[^58] and the entry of
the UK into the European Economic Community (EEC)[^59] did not cause
economic disruption, in spite of the scale of these regulatory changes.
The remuneration rights model is more limited in its scope than the NHS,
NAFTA or the EEC. However, there are parallels of a more comparable
scale within the field of pharmaceutical funding mechanisms. The
institutionalisation of government research funding in the form of
research councils is one such example.[^60] Such examples demonstrate
that it is possible to implement large systematic changes without
causing major disruption. Indeed, research by LPL Financial LLC
indicates that in the wake of significant events since 1950, the Dow
Jones has tended to rise between 3% and 5% after only one month,
following initial negative reactions.[^61] These examples, and typical
stock market behaviour in response to major events, suggest that
remuneration rights could be introduced seamlessly.

Some general conditions are likely to tend towards successful
transitions of this scale. Firstly, it is important that any such
transition is consistent with existing international law. Remuneration
rights would qualify as a TRIPS flexibility and so meet this condition.
Secondly, there must be a sufficient need to justify and motivate a
transition on this scale. The problems of access and innovation
highlighted in Section 2 amply meet this demand. Thirdly, careful
planning is required to avoid shocks to the markets. This would involve
extensive work with relevant stakeholders, and capacity building. Such
an approach in the case of remuneration rights would particularly
involve working with governments, non-governmental organisations and
pharmaceutical companies; and building manufacturing capacity. A final
criteria likely to tend towards successful large-scale transitions is
testing. As already mentioned, remuneration rights could be phased in
using pilots or other forms of transition. This would allow lessons to
be learned and design to be strengthened, without causing disruption.

VI. Are remuneration rights an improvement on patents?
=====================================================

A remuneration rights model is superior to patent-driven systems in
terms of access, innovation and cost. Remuneration rights offer
significant advantages over patents in terms of increasing access and
increasing innovation (and its impact), and importantly it does not pit
them against each other. Though there would of course be some costs
associated with a transition to a remuneration rights model, these would
be negligible compared to the benefits of the new system.

6.1 The criteria for comparison are access, innovation and cost
---------------------------------------------------------------

The most important criteria for comparing funding mechanisms for
pharmaceutical R&D are access, innovation, and cost. These can be
defined as follows:

-   **Access.** The proportion of potential beneficiaries of a given
     treatment who actually receive the treatment.

-   **Innovation.** The extent to which a given funding mechanism
     incentivizes innovation based on health impact.

-   **Cost.** The operational cost of the system.

6.2 Remuneration rights offer increased access
----------------------------------------------

Access to medicines increase substantially under a remuneration rights
model. In the patent system, the only source of income is through the
sale of the final drug, meaning the price of this must reflect both the
costs of manufacture, which are low, and R&D costs, which are high.
Consequently, only those with sufficient resources can access the drugs
produced, and there is a strong incentive to develop marketable, but not
necessarily impactful, drugs. There are also few incentives for
pharmaceutical companies to distribute their drugs widely beyond the
affluent markets that can afford them.

Under remuneration rights, there will be two payment streams, meaning
R&D costs are remunerated separately from the sale of drugs. Open
information and lack of market exclusivity would encourage competition
in manufacture, which would lower drug prices without threatening
innovation. Moreover, as remuneration rights are allocated in proportion
to health impact rather than market profitability, a new incentive is
created to research medicines for conditions mainly affecting the poor.
This would increase the number of medicines available, as well as
lowering the cost of each individual unit. Companies creating medicines
in a remuneration rights based system would also have an incentive to
distribute their medicines as widely as possible (provided that the
medicine has a positive health impact for the recipients).

The WHO estimates that around a third of the world's population does not
have access to medicines.[^62] Even assuming only a minority of these
people are prevented from accessing medicines because of affordability,
decreasing the cost of medicines would still be a health intervention of
huge import. Evidence suggests that the generic manufacture remuneration
rights enable would lead to significantly reduced prices; when there are
10 or more competitors producing a drug, generic prices approach
marginal cost.[^63] Such costs are likely to be much lower than the
prices of branded drugs the patent system requires. Figure 7 illustrates
this. The history of antiretroviral drugs, used to combat HIV, also
highlight this: under intense international pressure, between 2000 and
2013, prices dropped from \$10,000 per person per year to \$100, a
reduction of 99%.[^64] Given such differences, remuneration rights would
significantly improve access when compared with the patent system.

### Figure 7: Difference in price between in-patent (branded) and competitively manufactured (generic) medicines would be substantial[^65]

<img src="/img/whitepaper_figure7.png"/>

Source: Hill, Andrew. "Generics -- the Facts." presented at the 21st
Annual Conference of the British HIV Association (BHIVA), 2015.
[[http://www.bhiva.org/documents/Conferences/2015Brighton/Presentations/150422/AndrewHill.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.bhiva.org/documents/Conferences/2015Brighton/Presentations/150422/AndrewHill.pdf).

There are important conditions that need to be satisfied in order to
lower prices through generic competition. First, only a country or group
of countries with multiple pharmaceutical manufacturing firms would be
able to generate sufficient competition to lower prices. For a
remuneration rights model to be effective, this capacity will need to be
already in place, developed prior to launch or be supplemented
otherwise.

Second, in some countries most of the supply chain for medicines is
owned by pharmaceutical companies. This could potentially restrict
generic competition under a remuneration rights system, if wholesalers
owned by particular pharmaceutical companies refused to buy from
competitors. If participant countries had more open supply chains, this
would not be an issue. For cases like the UK and the US, where supply
chains are owned by pharmaceutical companies to a large extent, national
competitive tendering could resolve this problem.[^66] Denmark uses such
a system today, and drug prices have fallen substantially since 1995,
even in the absence of the remuneration rights system.[^67] Sweden,
Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium also operate similar tendering
systems for particular sets of drugs.[^68] While tendering systems
require careful design, they tend to lead to reductions in price.[^69]

6.3 Remuneration rights offer the same or increased innovation
--------------------------------------------------------------

The most common argument against reducing drug prices is that it will
harm future innovation. This argument makes sense in the patent system,
where access and innovation are directly traded off against one another.
However, the remuneration rights model allows more access while
maintaining the same or greater levels of innovation, and does not
structure these principles in conflict. The remuneration right itself
offers a financial incentive, just like a patent, to undertake research.
Provided that the size of the fund were adequate, innovators would
receive just as much as under the patent system. Moreover, remuneration
rights could also stimulate more effective innovation. Medicines of
greater health impact would receive greater remuneration, and those of
lesser less. This would direct innovation more effectively, so that for
the same amount of money more social value is created and a greater
number of people helped. It is also likely that the amount of innovation
would increase in a remuneration rights system, as open information
permits faster improvements upon the innovations of others.

Patents provide a financial incentive to innovation through market
exclusivity, enabling high prices to be charged and costs for R&D
recouped through sales. Remuneration rights provide a financial
incentive too, in the form of payments from the remuneration rights
fund. Provided that this fund is adequately resourced, then incentives
for innovation could be maintained at current levels.

Remuneration rights could also incentivize more effective medical
innovation. Under the patent system, profits are tied to units sold, not
the innovation's impact. Consequently, when those in need of medicines
do not provide a profitable market, for example through poverty or low
usage rates, patents fail to incentivize innovation. Given the
associations between wealth and health, this is a problematic way of
stimulating innovation. First, the poorer you are the more likely you
are to be in ill health. Second, diseases are distributed differently
between rich and poor populations, meaning that the poor often have
different medical needs to the rich. Finally, where cost-effectiveness
is concerned, the opportunities for health impact are often especially
high in resource poor settings, where general levels of health are
poorer and cheaper basic interventions can have a large impact. This
compounds the problem. As Scotchmer puts it, "*a research agenda driven
by patents is hostage to the market and to consumer sovereignty. The
consumers who are sovereign are those with resources."*[^70] Patents
stimulate the innovation that *wealthy* consumers are willing to pay
for, and not the innovation that *sick* consumers need. As Section 2.3
showed, patents are currently failing to incentivize innovation in
important disease areas, and over-stimulating less important research.
In contrast, remuneration rights incentivize innovation in direct
relation to health impact. Profits would be larger for medicines with
greater effect, which would be a combination of the severity of the
illness treated and the number of patients treated. This means that more
effective innovation would be incentivized by remuneration rights than
by patents.

Finally, there is also a chance that greater openness in research and
innovation would actually increase levels of innovation under the
remuneration rights system when compared with patents. Countries such as
Italy, Argentina and India for many years did not have patents on drugs,
yet they still had very vibrant, innovative and dynamic pharmaceutical
industries with substantial innovation in both processes and products.
However, with the introduction of patents their industries saw
substantial concentration, often coupled with a decline of local
industry and the associated innovation.[^71] Research in other fields
suggests similar processes. For instance, the US chemicals industry saw
a rapid increase in innovation after the First World War, when German
chemical patents were given compulsory licenses, opening information and
research to US companies.[^72] The remuneration rights system could
provide a similar boost to innovation while ensuring the innovator is
compensated for his work.

6.4 The costs of implementing a remuneration rights system are outweighed by the benefits
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Benefits in terms of access and innovation have to be weighed up against
the costs of running and transitioning to a remuneration rights system.
Transition costs would be considerable. Operational costs would be the
same or slightly higher than those associated with the patent system.
Comparing these costs with the benefits associated with the remuneration
rights system suggests that it would be a better funding mechanism than
patents.

Transitioning from the patent system to a remuneration rights model
would create large additional costs, albeit for a temporary period. New
institutions would have to be established and old ones repurposed;
possibly both systems would have to be administered alongside one
another for a time. There would be costs to business as new processes
were implemented for registering for remuneration rights and for
monitoring health impact. A feasibility study should cost such a
transition fully - but the total figure would clearly be in billions of
dollars.

The transition accomplished, there are then the operational costs of the
remuneration rights model to consider. The two most detailed previous
proposals to advocate for remuneration rights, MIPF and HIF, provide
ballpark figures for the cost of such a fund. MIPF, which would cover
all medical innovation in the US, proposed funding levels of 0.55% of
GDP annually.[^73] This would amount to something like \$80
billion.[^74] HIF, which would be a partial fund operating globally
alongside patents, suggested an initial funding level of \$6 billion
annually.[^75] Assuming that HIF represented one third of global
product, this would mean a contribution of around 0.03% of GNI
annually.[^76] The suggested costs of HIF and MIPF range widely in part
because the funds are designed on different scales, and in part because
no rigorous costing analysis has yet been undertaken for remuneration
rights models. This would be essential in a feasibility study. At the
present time it is clear that billions and probably tens of billions
would be required to operate a remuneration rights fund.

Though the remuneration rights model would likely cost billions of
dollars to implement, much of this would be offset. The sponsors of the
2011 MIPF bill estimated that the scheme would reduce the cost of drugs
in the US by more than \$250 billion.[^77] This would more than cover
the proposed \$80 billion cost to implement the fund. The designers of
HIF note a similar phenomenon:

 "*The net incremental cost to the partner countries would, however, be
 a fraction of this [0.03% of GNI], since there would be substantial
 savings from paying low prices on new, patented medicines registered
 with the HIF. . . These small net costs are associated with much
 larger benefits. They would stimulate the development of widely
 accessible new medicines that greatly reduce morbidity and premature
 mortality worldwide, would thereby improve global economic
 performance, and would also reduce dangers from heretofore neglected
 diseases.*"[^78]

Moreover, there is significant deadweight loss associated with the
current patent system. Deadweight loss occurs when people who want to
pay for a good and can afford to pay more than its marginal cost are
unable to do so because they cannot afford the much higher price
set.[^79] In the case of medicines the consumer is often the state,
health insurers or hospitals, but the same process applies. Deadweight
loss reduces the profits of pharmaceutical companies and the health
benefits that would have accrued from wider treatment. Under the
remuneration rights system, there would be next to no deadweight loss,
as medicines would be sold at close to the production cost. As well as
producing savings in terms of the cost of medicines, the introduction of
a remuneration rights system would also reduce deadweight losses. Aidan
Hollis provides a good summary of the estimates that have been made on
pharmaceutical deadweight losses:

 "*Guell and Fischbaum (1995), using highly aggregated data, claim that
 the scale of deadweight loss in the US drug market is on the order of
 \$3bn- \$30bn annually; in a more detailed paper (1997) the same
 authors estimate deadweight losses of \$5bn on \$8bn of sales, which
 indicates very large DWL deadweight loss for the market overall.
 Baker and Chatani (2002) construct a very rough estimate for DWL of
 \$5bn - \$20bn annually for the US. Globally, the DWL is certain to be
 many times this figure, because in many markets, drug insurance is
 unavailable and so consumers are more price-sensitive.*"[^80]

In 2004, Baker estimated that annual deadweight loss in the US was
around \$25 billion, and would exceed \$100 billion by 2013.[^81] The
vast majority of this loss would be recouped under the remuneration
rights system.

Taking into consideration both the transitional and the operational
costs of the system, and weighing these against savings in drug prices
and reductions in deadweight losses, suggests that the benefits of the
remuneration rights system would strongly outweigh the costs. Figure 8
summarises the comparison between remuneration rights and the patent
system.

###

###  

### Figure 8: Comparison between remuneration rights and patents on access, innovation and cost indicate remuneration rights is superior on all measures

|                 | **Patents**     | **Remuneration rights** | **Notes** |
|    -----        |     ------      |       -----             |   -----   |
| **Access**      | ✗✗              | ✓✓              | Remunerations rights permit free market competition in manufacture because research is freey and open for anyone to use. This lowers the price of drugs and provides greater access. Patents use high monopoly prices to recoup the costs of R&D, so fewer people have access to more expensive drugs under this system. In addition, lower prices and increased access especially helps the poor. Those with fewer resources lose out disproportionately from high drug prices under patents and gain disproportionately from lower prices under remuneration rights. Additionally, under patents there are limited incentives to innovate for diseases of the poor, because they do not present a lucrative potential market. There is consequently a dearth of R&D to begin with for diseases of the poor, which reduces the medicines available for them. Under remuneration rights, by default, all health impact is treated equally whether a rich or a poor group benefits. |
| **Innovation**  | ✓               | ✓✓              | Remuneration rights and patents provide the same level of financial incentive to innovators. Whilst similar to patents in this general respect, remuneration rights may also provide advantages over patents regarding innovation: -   Payments to innovators are directly linked to health impact under remuneration rights, which means that innovation incentives are more directly tied to outcomes and value than under patents. -   Remuneration rights allow open access to all research, which stimulates follow-on innovation and reduces the risk of holdup.   |
| **Cost**        | ✓               | ✓               | The costs of operating the remuneration rights system would be similar to that of running the current system we have. The patent office would become a remuneration office, grants would continue as today, health impact assessment would be performed by HTAs that already exist etc. The only additional expense would be the actual administration of the remuneration rights fund but this should be relatively limited given the transparent, pre-defined nature of the distributions (and this may even be cost-saving if it saves on current bureaucracy elsewhere in the system).|

VII. Conclusion
=============

We urgently need to reconceptualize how we think of and finance medical
innovation. The patent monopoly system positions access to medicines and
innovation as inevitably in tension. Millions globally cannot access the
medicines they need to survive and thrive, and many areas urgently
requiring new medicines are neglected due to the lack of a profitable
market. Such a system fails society, and it also fails industry, by
obstructing research and slowly but inevitably changing public
perception of pharmaceutical companies from contributors to the public
good to fraudulent exploiters of the vulnerable.

By rewarding innovation and manufacture separately, we can resolve this
structural opposition and have a win-win: access and innovation at the
same time. Moreover, by rewarding innovation based on health impact
rather than final sales, we can refocus the aims of the pharmaceutical
industry on promoting health -- whilst maintaining profits. This is a
boon to society and to industry, vastly expanding both access and the
avenues of possible research that might be pursued, not to mention the
speed at which this might be done.

This change is both desirable and possible. The structural and
infrastructural precursors for a remuneration rights based system are
already in place, and many of them can be drawn from existing
intellectual property and public health systems. Beyond being
practically feasible, such a change is also politically desirable, and
importantly in a bipartisan way. Expanded access to healthcare benefits
all, and enhanced avenues for innovation and remuneration are a boon to
small and big businesses alike.

Now is the time for change. The current patent-driven mechanism of
medical innovation is not working for anyone. This paper puts forth the
case for implementing a large systemic change, showing this not only to
be necessary but also incredibly desirable and feasible. It is important
that this theoretical work is supplemented by a rigorous, empirical
feasibility study, demonstrating how such a system would work in
reality. Given the significant systemic failures of the current system,
and the amounts of money spent attempting to balance access and
innovation, there is clear momentum to do so.

Ahead of us is the possibility of a world where medical innovation is
cutting edge, profitable, impactful and available to all. No one should
die for lack of access to a medicine that exists and has been paid for
yet is held out of reach, nor should researchers and industry have to
choose between developing genuinely useful therapies or those of little
impact that generate profit. A better system of improved access and
innovation is achievable, and given the manifest problems today a
priority of public health research should be exploring this possibility.


=

VIII. Bibliography
===============

 "2015 Patent Dispute Report." Unified Patents. Accessed December 22,
 2017.
 [[https://www.unifiedpatents.com/news/2016/5/30/2015-patent-dispute-report]{.underline}](https://www.unifiedpatents.com/news/2016/5/30/2015-patent-dispute-report).

 "A Look Back at Pharmaceuticals in 2006: Aggressive Advertising Cannot
 Hide the Absence of Therapeutic Advances." *Prescrire International*
 16, no. 88 (2006): 80--86.

 Angell, Marcia. *The Truth about the Drug Companies: How They Deceive
 Us and What to Do about It*. New York: Random House, 2004.

 "Anti-Aging Market (Baby Boomer, Generation X and Generation Y), by
 Product (Botox, Anti-Wrinkle Products, Anti-Stretch Mark Products, and
 Others), by Services (Anti-Pigmentation Therapy, Anti-Adult Acne
 Therapy, Breast Augmentation, Liposuction, Chemical Peel, Hair
 Restoration Treatment, and Others), by Device (Microdermabrasion,
 Laser Aesthetics, Anti-Cellulite Treatment and Anti-Aging Radio
 Frequency Devices) : Global Industry Perspective, Comprehensive
 Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Segment, Trends and Forecast, 2015 --
 2021." Market Report. Zion Market Research, 2016.
 [[https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/toc/anti-aging-market]{.underline}](https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/toc/anti-aging-market).

 Baker, Dean. "Financing Drug Research: What Are the Issues?"
 Washington, DC: Issue Brief, Center for Economic and Policy Research,
 2004.

 Barral, P. Étienne, and Rhône-Poulenc Rorer Foundation. *20 Years of
 Pharmaceutical Research Results throughout the World (1975-94)*.
 Antony, France: Rhône-Poulenc Rorer Foundation, 1996.

 Bigdeli, Maryam, David H. Peters, and Anita K. Wagner. "Medicines in
 Health Systems: Advancing Access, Affordability and Appropriate Use,"
 2014.
 [[http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/179197/1/9789241507622\_eng.pdf]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/179197/1/9789241507622_eng.pdf).

 Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine. *Against Intellectual
 Monopoly*. Ebook Central. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
 [[https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=352991]{.underline}](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=352991).

 Burfisher, Mary E., Sherman Robinson, and Karen Thierfelder. "The
 Impact of NAFTA on the United States." *Journal of Economic
 Perspectives* 15, no. 1 (2001): 125--144.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.15.1.125]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.15.1.125).

 Burt, James. "Lessons to Be Learnt? - An Overview of Tendering
 Processes for Medicines across Europe." Accord, n.d.
 [[http://www.accord-healthcare.eu/files/files/homepage-files/Tendering%20system%20BJMP%20by%20James%20Burt.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.accord-healthcare.eu/files/files/homepage-files/Tendering%20system%20BJMP%20by%20James%20Burt.pdf).

 Crafts, Nicholas. "The Growth Effects of EU Membership for the UK:
 Review of the Evidence." Global Perspectives Series, 2016.
 [[http://www.smf.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/SMF-CAGE-The-Growth-Effects-of-EU-Membership-for-the-UK-a-Review-of-the-Evidence-.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.smf.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/SMF-CAGE-The-Growth-Effects-of-EU-Membership-for-the-UK-a-Review-of-the-Evidence-.pdf).

 Crow, David. "Pfizer Raises US Prices of 91 Drugs by 20% in 2017."
 Financial Times, June 2, 2017.
 [[https://www.ft.com/content/b2e0dd80-47ab-11e7-8519-9f94ee97d996]{.underline}](https://www.ft.com/content/b2e0dd80-47ab-11e7-8519-9f94ee97d996).

 Cunningham, Paul, Abdullah Gök, and Philippe Laredo. "The Impact of
 Direct Support to R&D and Innovation in Firms." Nesta Working Paper
 No. 13/03, 2013.
 [[https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/the\_impact\_of\_direct\_support\_to\_rd\_and\_innovation\_in\_firms.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/the_impact_of_direct_support_to_rd_and_innovation_in_firms.pdf).

 "Delivering on the Global Partnership for Achieving the Millennium
 Development Goals." United Nations, MDG Gap Task Force, 2008.
 [[http://www.who.int/medicines/mdg/MDG08ChapterEMedsEn.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/medicines/mdg/MDG08ChapterEMedsEn.pdf).

 Drummond, Michael. *Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Health Care
 Programmes*. 3rd ed. Oxford Medical Publications. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press, 2005.

 Dylst, Pieter, Arnold Vulto, and Steven Simoens. "Tendering for
 Outpatient Prescription Pharmaceuticals: What Can Be Learned from
 Current Practices in Europe?" *Health Policy* 101, no. 2 (July 1,
 2011): 146--52.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2011.03.004]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2011.03.004).

 Frost, Laura J., Michael R. Reich, and others. *Access: How Do Good
 Health Technologies Get to Poor People in Poor Countries?* Harvard
 Center for Population and Development Studies, 2008.
 [[https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/20103004633]{.underline}](https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/20103004633).

 "Fund for Research and Development in Neglected Diseases." CEWG
 submission, 2011.
 [[http://www.who.int/phi/news/phi\_20\_cewg\_frind\_en.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/phi/news/phi_20_cewg_frind_en.pdf).

 "Geneva Technical Workshop on Proposals for a Cancer Innovation Fund
 (CIF) -- Union for Affordable Cancer Treatment," 2017.
 [[https://cancerunion.org/2017/02/01/101/]{.underline}](https://cancerunion.org/2017/02/01/101/).

 "GHO \| By Category \| Antiretroviral Therapy Coverage - Data and
 Estimates by Country." WHO. Accessed October 25, 2017.
 [[http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.626]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.626).

 "GHO \| By Category \| Treatment Coverage - Data by WHO Region." WHO.
 Accessed October 31, 2017.
 [[http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.57056ALL?lang=en]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.57056ALL?lang=en).

 "Global Hepatitis Report, 2017." World Health Organisation, 2017.
 [[http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/255016/1/9789241565455-eng.pdf?ua=1]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/255016/1/9789241565455-eng.pdf?ua=1).

 "Global Strategy on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual
 Property." WHA, 2008.
 [[http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf\_files/WHA61-REC1/A61\_Rec1-part2-en.pdf?ua=1]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA61-REC1/A61_Rec1-part2-en.pdf?ua=1).

 Gold, Marthe R. *Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine*. Ebook
 Central. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
 [[https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=679610]{.underline}](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=679610).

 "Health Spending Explorer." *Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker*
 (blog). Accessed October 25, 2017.
 [[https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/interactive/]{.underline}](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/interactive/).

 Hill, Andrew. "Generics -- the Facts." presented at the 21st Annual
 Conference of the British HIV Association (BHIVA), 2015.
 [[http://www.bhiva.org/documents/Conferences/2015Brighton/Presentations/150422/AndrewHill.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.bhiva.org/documents/Conferences/2015Brighton/Presentations/150422/AndrewHill.pdf).

 "Historical Stock Market Reactions to Geopolitical and Economic Crisis
 Events." *LPL Financial Research* (blog), April 21, 2017.
 [[https://lplresearch.com/2017/04/21/historical-stock-market-reactions-to-geopolitical-and-economic-crisis-events/]{.underline}](https://lplresearch.com/2017/04/21/historical-stock-market-reactions-to-geopolitical-and-economic-crisis-events/).

 Hollis, Aidan. "An Efficient Reward System for Pharmaceutical
 Innovation," 2005.
 [[http://www.who.int/intellectualproperty/news/en/Submission-Hollis6-Oct.pdf]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/intellectualproperty/news/en/Submission-Hollis6-Oct.pdf).

 Hollis, Aidan, and Thomas Pogge. *The Health Impact Fund: Making New
 Medicines Accessible for All*. Incentives for Global Health, 2008.
 [[http://healthimpactfund.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/hif\_book.pdf]{.underline}](http://healthimpactfund.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/hif_book.pdf).

 "Horizon ​Scan ​Report." iMed:​ ​Innovating Medical​
 ​Entrepreneurship​ ​and​ ​Delivery, 2017.
 [[http://imedproject.org/research/horizon-scan/imed-horizon-scan-report.pdf]{.underline}](http://imedproject.org/research/horizon-scan/imed-horizon-scan-report.pdf).

 "How a Global R&D Convention Could Fill the Gaps Left by Today's
 Medical Innovation System." MSF, 2012.
 [[https://www.msfaccess.org/sites/default/files/MSF\_assets/Innovation/Docs/MedInno\_Briefing\_GlobalConventionRD\_ENG\_2012Update.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.msfaccess.org/sites/default/files/MSF_assets/Innovation/Docs/MedInno_Briefing_GlobalConventionRD_ENG_2012Update.pdf).

 Hunt, M.I. "Prescription Drugs and Intellectual Property Protection:
 Finding the Right Balance between Access and Innovation." Washington,
 DC: NIH, 2000.

 Jon Cohen, Jon. "How the Battle Lines over CRISPR Were Drawn." Science
 \| AAAS, February 15, 2017.
 [[http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/02/how-battle-lines-over-crispr-were-drawn]{.underline}](http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/02/how-battle-lines-over-crispr-were-drawn).

 "Judging Whether Public Health Interventions Offer Value for Money \|
 Guidance and Guidelines." Accessed November 29, 2017.
 [[https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/lgb10/chapter/judging-the-cost-effectiveness-of-public-health-activities]{.underline}](https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/lgb10/chapter/judging-the-cost-effectiveness-of-public-health-activities).

 Kaitin, K. I., N. R. Phelan, D. Raiford, and B. Morris. "Therapeutic
 Ratings and End-of-Phase II Conferences: Initiatives to Accelerate the
 Availability of Important New Drugs." *Journal of Clinical
 Pharmacology* 31, no. 1 (January 1991): 17--24.

 Kamal, Babah, Cox, Cynthia. "What Are the Recent and Forecasted Trends
 in Prescription Drug Spending?" *Peterson-Kaiser Health System
 Tracker* (blog). Accessed November 16, 2017.
 [[https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/recent-forecasted-trends-prescription-drug-spending/]{.underline}](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/recent-forecasted-trends-prescription-drug-spending/).

 Kanavos, Panos, Elizabeth Seeley, and Sotiris Vandoros. "Tender
 Systems for Outpatient Pharmaceuticals in the European Union: Evidence
 from the Netherlands, Germany and Belgium." Enterprise and Industry,
 European Commission, 2010.

 Koskinen, Hanna, Elina Ahola, Leena K Saastamoinen, Hennamari Mikkola,
 and Jaana E Martikainen. "The Impact of Reference Pricing and
 Extension of Generic Substitution on the Daily Cost of Antipsychotic
 Medication in Finland." *Health Economics Review* 4 (August 19, 2014).
 [[https://doi.org/10.1186/s13561-014-0009-3]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13561-014-0009-3).

 Kremer, Michael R. "Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging
 Innovation" 113, no. 4 (1998): 1137--67.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555865]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555865).

 Lesher, Molly, and Sébastien Miroudot. "Analysis of the Economic
 Impact of Investment Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements." *IDEAS
 Working Paper Series from RePEc*, 2006.

 Light, Donald W., and Joel R. Lexchin. "Pharmaceutical Research and
 Development: What Do We Get for All That Money?" *BMJ* 345 (2012):
 e4348.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e4348]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e4348).

 "Longitude Prize \| Enter the Prize." Accessed August 16, 2017.
 [[https://longitudeprize.org/]{.underline}](https://longitudeprize.org/).

 Love, James. "Measures to Enhance Access to Medical Technologies, and
 New Methods of Stimulating Medical R&D." *U.C. Davis Law Review* 40
 (2007 2006): 679.

 Love, James, and Tim Hubbard. "Prizes for Innovation of New Medicines
 and Vaccines." *Annals of Health Law* 18, no. 2 (2009): 155--86, 8 p.
 preceding i.

 ---------. "The Big Idea: Prizes to Stimulate R&D for New Medicines."
 *Chicago-Kent Law Review* 82 (2007): 1519.

 Matthijs, Gert, and Dicky Halley. "European-Wide Opposition against
 the Breast Cancer Gene Patents." *European Journal of Human Genetics*
 10, no. 12 (December 2002): 783.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200924]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200924).

 "Medicines Patent Pool." Accessed July 13, 2017.
 [[http://www.medicinespatentpool.org]{.underline}](http://www.medicinespatentpool.org).

 Morgan, Steven G., Kenneth L. Bassett, James M. Wright, Robert G.
 Evans, Morris L. Barer, Patricia A. Caetano, and Charlyn D. Black.
 "'Breakthrough' Drugs and Growth in Expenditure on Prescription Drugs
 in Canada." *BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)* 331, no. 7520 (2005):
 815--16.

 Moser, Petra, and Alessandra Voena. "Compulsory Licensing: Evidence
 from the Trading with the Enemy Act." *American Economic Review* 102,
 no. 1 (2012): 396--427.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.1.396]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.1.396).

 Motola, Domenico, Fabrizio De Ponti, Elisabetta Poluzzi, Nello
 Martini, Pasqualino Rossi, Maria Chiara Silvani, Alberto Vaccheri, and
 Nicola Montanaro. "An Update on the First Decade of the European
 Centralized Procedure: How Many Innovative Drugs?" *British Journal of
 Clinical Pharmacology* 62, no. 5 (2006): 610--616.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2125.2006.02700.x]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2125.2006.02700.x).

 Neumann, Peter J. *Using Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Improve Health
 Care: Opportunities and Barriers*. Oxford Scholarship Online. New
 York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
 [[https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195171860.001.0001]{.underline}](https://ezproxy-prd.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/login?url=http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195171860.001.0001).

 "New Products and New Indications in 2016: A System That Favours
 Imitation over the Pursuit of Real Progress." *Prescrire
 International* 26, no. 182 (2017): 136--39.

 Pedersen, K. Møller. "Pricing and Reimbursement of Drugs in Denmark."
 *The European Journal of Health Economics* 4, no. 1 (March 1, 2003):
 60--65.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1007/s10198-003-0165-6]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10198-003-0165-6).

 Perlberg, Steven. "This Is What Happens To The Stock Market When
 Terrible Things Happen In The World." Business Insider. Accessed
 November 29, 2017.
 [[http://www.businessinsider.com/how-stocks-react-geopolitical-events-2014-3]{.underline}](http://www.businessinsider.com/how-stocks-react-geopolitical-events-2014-3).

 Peters, David H., Anu Garg, Gerry Bloom, Damian G. Walker, William R.
 Brieger, and M. Hafizur Rahman. "Poverty and Access to Health Care in
 Developing Countries." *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences*
 1136, no. 1 (2008): 161--71.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1425.011]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1425.011).

 "Pharma 2020: The Vision Which Path Will You Take?" Price Waterhouse
 Coopers, n.d.
 [[https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/pharma-life-sciences/pdf/pharma2020final.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/pharma-life-sciences/pdf/pharma2020final.pdf).

 "Promoting Innovation and Access to Health Technologies." Report of
 the UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL'S HIGH-LEVEL PANEL ON ACCESS TO
 MEDICINES, 2016.
 [[https://static1.squarespace.com/static/562094dee4b0d00c1a3ef761/t/596fed6d914e6b24d15ece26/1500507506991/50923+-+HLP+Report+-+ENGLISH+-+web\_v3.pdf]{.underline}](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/562094dee4b0d00c1a3ef761/t/596fed6d914e6b24d15ece26/1500507506991/50923+-+HLP+Report+-+ENGLISH+-+web_v3.pdf).

 Ravvin, Michael. "Incentivizing Access and Innovation for Essential
 Medicines: A Survey of the Problem and Proposed Solutions." *Public
 Health Ethics* 1, no. 2 (2008): 110--23.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1093/phe/phn017]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1093/phe/phn017).

 Reiffen, David, and Michael R. Ward. "Generic Drug Industry Dynamics."
 *Review of Economics and Statistics* 87, no. 1 (2005): 37--49.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1162/0034653053327694]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1162/0034653053327694).

 "Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing
 Countries: Strengthening Global Financing and Coordination." Report of
 the Consultative Expert Working Group on Research and Development:
 Financing and Coordination. World Health Organisation, 2012.
 [[http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/254706/1/9789241503457-eng.pdf?ua=1]{.underline}](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/254706/1/9789241503457-eng.pdf?ua=1).

 "Resolution On Cancer Hailed By WHO Members, Easily Adopted In
 Committee." *Intellectual Property Watch* (blog), 2017.
 [[https://www.ip-watch.org/2017/05/31/resolution-cancer-hailed-members-easily-adopted-committee/]{.underline}](https://www.ip-watch.org/2017/05/31/resolution-cancer-hailed-members-easily-adopted-committee/).

 Røttingen, John-Arne, Sadie Regmi, Mari Eide, Alison J. Young, Roderik
 F. Viergever, Christine Årdal, Javier Guzman, Danny Edwards, Stephen
 A. Matlin, and Robert F. Terry. "Mapping of Available Health Research
 and Development Data: What's There, What's Missing, and What Role Is
 There for a Global Observatory?" *The Lancet* 382, no. 9900 (2013):
 1286--1307.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61046-6]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61046-6).

 Sanders, Bernard. "Text - H.R.417 - 109th Congress (2005-2006):
 Medical Innovation Prize Act of 2005." Webpage, 2005.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/109th-congress/house-bill/417/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/109th-congress/house-bill/417/text).

 ---------. "Text - S.495 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): Medical
 Innovation Prize Fund Act." Webpage, 2017.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/495/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/495/text).

 ---------. "Text - S.627 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Medical
 Innovation Prize Fund Act." Webpage, 2013.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/627/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/627/text).

 ---------. "Text - S.1137 - 112th Congress (2011-2012): Medical
 Innovation Prize Fund Act." Webpage, 2012.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/1137/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/1137/text).

 ---------. "Text - S.1138 - 112th Congress (2011-2012): Prize Fund for
 HIV/AIDS Act." Webpage, 2012.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/1138/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/1138/text).

 ---------. "Text - S.2210 - 110th Congress (2007-2008): Medical
 Innovation Prize Act of 2007." Webpage, 2007.
 [[https://www.congress.gov/bill/110th-congress/senate-bill/2210/text]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/bill/110th-congress/senate-bill/2210/text).

 Scotchmer, Suzanne. *Innovation and Incentives*. Cambridge, Mass. ;
 London: MIT Press, 2004.

 Seddoh, Anthony, Adiele Onyeze, John Owusu Gyapong, Janet Holt, and
 Donald Bundy. "Towards an Investment Case for Neglected Tropical
 Diseases." LANCET COMMISSION ON INVESTING IN HEALTH WORKING PAPER,
 2013.
 [[http://globalhealth2035.org/sites/default/files/working-papers/towards-an-investment-case.pdf]{.underline}](http://globalhealth2035.org/sites/default/files/working-papers/towards-an-investment-case.pdf).

 "Selected Innovation Prizes and Reward Programs." KEI Research Note.
 Knowledge Ecology International, 2008.
 [[https://www.keionline.org/misc-docs/research\_notes/kei\_rn\_2008\_1.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.keionline.org/misc-docs/research_notes/kei_rn_2008_1.pdf).

 Smedley, Tim. "Is It Fair to Accuse the Pharma Industry of Neglecting
 Tropical Diseases?" *The Guardian*, October 15, 2015, sec. Guardian
 Sustainable Business.
 [[http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/15/pharma-industry-neglecting-tropical-diseases-snake-bite]{.underline}](http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/15/pharma-industry-neglecting-tropical-diseases-snake-bite).

 Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property
 Rights." *Duke Law Journal* 57, no. 6 (2008): 1693--1724.
 [[https://doi.org/10.2307/40040630]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.2307/40040630).

 "The Medical Innovation Prize Fund: A New Paradigm for Supporting
 Sustainable Innovation and Access to New Drugs: De-Linking Markets for
 Products from Markets for Innovation," 2011.
 [[https://www.keionline.org/sites/default/files/big\_prize\_fund\_overview\_26may2011\_letter.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.keionline.org/sites/default/files/big_prize_fund_overview_26may2011_letter.pdf).

 "The PDP+ Fund: Accelerating R&D in New Products for Diseases of
 Poverty." *Science Speaks: HIV & TB News* (blog), 2010.
 [[https://sciencespeaks.wordpress.com/2010/05/17/the-pdp-fund-accelerating-rd-in-new-products-for-diseases-of-poverty/]{.underline}](https://sciencespeaks.wordpress.com/2010/05/17/the-pdp-fund-accelerating-rd-in-new-products-for-diseases-of-poverty/).

 "The Swedish Pharmaceutical Reimbursement System." LFN Pharmaceutical
 Benefits Board, 2007.
 [[https://www.tlv.se/upload/english/eng-swe-pharma-reimbursement-system.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.tlv.se/upload/english/eng-swe-pharma-reimbursement-system.pdf).

 "The World Bank \| Data, United-States." The World Bank \| Data, 2017.
 [[https://data.worldbank.org/country/united-states]{.underline}](https://data.worldbank.org/country/united-states).

 "Untangling the Web of Antiretroviral Price Reductions." MSF, 2013.
 [[https://www.msf.org/sites/msf.org/files/msf\_access\_utw\_16th\_edition\_2013.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.msf.org/sites/msf.org/files/msf_access_utw_16th_edition_2013.pdf).

 Van Luijn, Johan C. F., Frank W. J. Gribnau, and Hubert G. M.
 Leufkens. "Superior Efficacy of New Medicines." *European Journal of
 Clinical Pharmacology* 66, no. 5 (2010): 445--448.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-010-0808-3]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-010-0808-3).

 "WHA59.24: Public Health, Innovation, Essential Health Research and
 Intellectual Property Rights: Towards a Global Strategy and Plan of
 Action," 2006.
 [[http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2006/october/tradoc\_130884.pdf]{.underline}](http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2006/october/tradoc_130884.pdf).

 "WHO \| Estimates of Disease Burden and Cost-Effectiveness." WHO.
 Accessed September 11, 2017.
 [[http://www.who.int/immunization/monitoring\_surveillance/burden/estimates/en/]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/immunization/monitoring_surveillance/burden/estimates/en/).

 "WHO \| Hepatitis C." WHO. Accessed October 25, 2017.
 [[http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs164/en/]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs164/en/).

 "WHO \| Immunization Coverage." WHO. Accessed September 11, 2017.
 [[http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs378/en/]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs378/en/).

 "WHO \| Meeting the Need for Treatment: The Initiatives." WHO.
 Accessed June 26, 2017.
 [[http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/84/5/news30506/en/]{.underline}](http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/84/5/news30506/en/).

 Wirtz, Veronika J., Hans V. Hogerzeil, Andrew L. Gray, Maryam Bigdeli,
 Cornelis P. de Joncheere, Margaret A. Ewen, Martha Gyansa-Lutterodt,
 et al. "Essential Medicines for Universal Health Coverage." *The
 Lancet* 389, no. 10067 (2017): 403--76.
 [[https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31599-9]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31599-9).

IX. List of figures
==================

Figure 1: [US prescription drug
expenditure](#_r44sbdy9h3qq)
Figure 2: [Trends in therapeutic benefit](#_4jzsi6b0ukce)
Figure 3: [Access to treatment for HIV, Hepatitis C and TB](#_yanijd3o46jr)
Figure 4: [The remuneration rights model](#_8wqq15fs7yby)
Figure 5: [The flow of money and medicines under the remuneration rights system](#_baq2ii489t9i)
Figure 6: [Common institutions in the remuneration rights and patent systems](#_nwinpqea1l6e)
Figure 7: [Difference between branded and generic prices](#_ao3jsjbvj36)
Figure 8: [Summary of comparison between remuneration rights and patents](#_2nijg9x6j8pi)

X. List of abbreviations
=========================

  **DALY**               Disability-Adjusted Life Years
  **DWL**                Deadweight Loss
  **EEC**                European Economic Area
  **EU**                 European Union
  **FDA**                Food and Drug Administration
  **HIF**                Health Impact Fund
  **HIV**                Human Immunodeficiency Virus
  **MIPF**               Medical Innovation Prize Fund
  **NAFT**              North American Free Trade Agreement
  **NHS**                National Health Service
  **NICE**               National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
  **QALY**               Quality-Adjusted Life Years
  **R&D**                Research and Development
  **TB**                 Tuberculosis
  **TRIPS**              Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
  **UK**                 United Kingdom
  **US**                 United States
  **WHO**                World Health Organization



XI. Glossary
============

### Access

Access To Medicines (ATM) 'is defined as having medicines continuously
available and affordable at public or private health facilities or
medicine outlets that are within one hour's walk from the homes of the
population\'.[^82] A pared down way of defining access is the proportion
of the potential beneficiaries of a given treatment who actually receive
the treatment.

### Deadweight loss

Deadweight loss is a loss of economic efficiency. The phrase often
describes circumstances where consumers want to buy what a producer
wants to sell, but this fails to happen because of a market
inefficiency, often with regards pricing. Scotchmer writes, \'Deadweight
loss occurs when people are excluded from using the good even though
their willingness to pay are higher than the marginal cost.\'[^83] This
is a particular problem in monopoly settings, were lack of competition
means that the price can be set at a high level, thus excluding those
with lower willingness to pay. It also becomes an especially stark
problem in the case of information goods, where the marginal cost is
very low or even nothing (and thus the most efficient distribution would
be to grant universal access).

### Health impact

A health impact can be positive or negative. A positive health impact is
an effect which contributes to good health or to improving health. A
negative health impact has the opposite effect, causing or contributing
to ill health[^84]. Within the context of remuneration right model,
assessing positive health impact is central to the allocation of
*\"equitable remuneration\"* from the remuneration right fund. We
propose to measure health impact using QALYs and DALYs.

### Marginal cost

Marginal cost means the additional cost of producing one more unit of a
good or service. It is different from the average cost, which includes
fixed costs as well as variable costs. Marginal costs only include the
variable costs (once the factory has been built in the first place,
there is no additional fixed cost to producing one more rubber toy). In
the case of information goods, marginal costs are low and fixed costs
high.

### Remuneration rights

A system where innovators are awarded repeated remuneration rights after
registering their innovation. Remuneration rights would give their
owners the right to payment from a central fund according to the value
generated by the innovation: how much a given drug improved health.

Appendices
==========

Appendix 1: Comparison with previous proposals
----------------------------------------------

### Appendix 1.1: Remuneration rights-like proposals[^85]


  **Cancer Innovation Fund (CIF)**[^86]                                      A proposal to delink R&D costs from drug and vaccine prices in the case of cancer. Proposed by various actors in 2008, 2009, 2014 and 2017. The proposal is broad in allowing for any kind of delinkage of R&D and manufacture and does not currently detail a specific favoured alternative.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Currently under discussion.
  **Medical Innovation Prize Fund (MIPF)**[^87]                              A proposal for a compulsory fund to replace the patent monopoly rights system in the US and remunerate innovators on the basis of the health impact they create. Presented by Bernie Sanders to the House of Representatives in 2005 and the Senate in 2007, 2011, 2013 and 2017.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Currently under discussion.
  **Health Impact Fund (HIF)**[^88]                                          A proposal to create an optional fund which would remunerate medical R&D according to health impact. Proposed by Hollis and Pogge in 2008.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Discussed largely in academic circles.
  **Global framework for essential health R&D**[^89]                         A series of proposals to the WHO to create a global framework committing states to contribute a certain level of funding into a pooled fund, which would be disbursed in a variety of ways including remuneration rights. The 'global framework' in particular refers to a 2006 resolution, but here shall be used as an umbrella term for the process relating to such proposals which began in 2005, included the 2008 global strategy and plan of action on medical R&D funding and coordination and culminated in 2012.   A process which still has repercussions today but whose vision has not been fully realised. There is still no global pooled fund.
  **PDP+ Fund**[^90]                                                         A proposal for a fund for R&D into neglected diseases, which awards remuneration to innovators on condition of pro-access measures. Proposed by Novartis, the George Institute, and [[IAVI]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1W5hf2Dx8rL-PeEIkqy-x66snuW9n2Vpy9LuWTFxEghM/edit#heading=h.h6moznmzhn6) in 2010.                                                                                                                                                                                                 A one-off proposal.
  **Fund for Research and Development in Neglected Diseases (FRIND)**[^91]   A proposal for an optional fund for R&D into neglected diseases which awards remuneration to innovators provided that their drugs are sold affordably. Proposed by Novartis to the EWG in 2009 and the [[CEWG]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1W5hf2Dx8rL-PeEIkqy-x66snuW9n2Vpy9LuWTFxEghM/edit#heading=h.h6moznmzhn6) in 2011.                                                                                                                                                                              A one-off proposal.
  **Australian Democrats Prize Proposal**[^92]                               An optional, international public good patent scheme, where innovators are rewarded from a fund in relation to health impact. Proposed in 2007 by the Australian Democrats.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A one-off proposal.

### Appendix 1.2: Other kinds of funding mechanism

#### Appendix 1.2.1 Prizes

Prizes as a funding mechanism boast many successfully implemented
proposals. Prizes take many forms, including milestone prizes, end
prizes, tournaments and advanced market commitments. In terms of access
and innovation, there is a disjunct between the technically possible and
the actually implemented where it comes to prizes. Prizes can be made
conditional on access provisions, and there is no reason that a prize
should not be made conditional on health impact and thus provide an
efficient incentive. However, while prizes often come with access
requirements, they are not usually set in relation to health impact
because of the difficulty of measuring these same. Instead, prizes tend
to focus on a specified research achievement. This means they do not
necessarily incentivize innovation in relation to health impact, and so
are only a partial solution to the access and innovation problem.

#### Appendix 1.2.2 Grants

Grants are a push funding mechanism: grants fund research upfront,
rather than after the fact.[^93] Currently, grants are a very widely
used form of funding in medical R&D, and are uncontroversial. Even
strong opponents of the current system agree that grants should continue
to operate as a funding mechanism.[^94] Grants are the most suitable
mechanisms for early stage research, as information remains open for
others to build upon and funding is not tied to specific outcomes,
allowing exploratory work. Among the many proposals to improve the
current state of medical R&D, few proposals concern improving the grants
system, which also suggests that this funding mechanism is working
reasonably.[^95] However, as a funding mechanism, grants have little to
do with access. They provide no incentive to translate research into a
marketable product, so this stage in development is usually undertaken
by commercial firms who then patent the results.[^96] This makes grant
funding poorly suited to dealing with the problem of access. Grant
funding does provide a significant boost to innovation, but does not
exert strong incentives regarding health impact. This is because grants
are provided upfront, and it is very difficult to predict health impact
before the fact. It might also be undesirable for all funding to be
directly tied to health impact: we need basic research, and grant
funding is excellent at resourcing this. Essential though grant funding
will remain, its functioning is only distantly related to the problems
of access and impact-based innovation.

Appendix 2: Situation, Complication, Question, Hypothesis (SCQH)
----------------------------------------------------------------

An SCQH is a problem solving tool. It can be used in a number of ways,
here it is particularly useful to structure our research. SCQH stands
for Situation, Complication, Question and Hypothesis. The goal is to
pave the way toward a clearly formulated Hypothesis, which can then be
tested.

### Situation

Medicines are expensive to research and cheap to make and millions of
people need them; meanwhile funding mechanisms are not directly linked
to health impact, profits are based on prices, and the existence of
monopoly patents supports prices well above the cost of manufacture.

### Complication

Monopoly patents fund innovation through high prices, creating an
inevitable tension between access and innovation; and currently denying
access to medicines for millions of people through inflated prices and
lack of innovation in non-profitable areas, and failing to incentivize
for health impact or efficiency of research and manufacture.

### Question

What funding mechanisms can replace the tension between innovation and
access inherent in the current patent system; incentivising
innovation based on cost effective health impact, providing incentives
for innovation as high as today, and providing access at close to the
cost of manufacture.

### Hypothesis

The best resolution to the tension between access and innovation is a
remuneration rights model that removes the dilemma and offers incentives
for both innovation and access; it provides a free market,
state-independent mechanism resourced by the state and philanthropists
that incentivizes innovations via remuneration based on health impact,
on condition that the innovations are free to use and unrestricted,
allowing for competition in manufacturing and therefore lower prices for
medicines whilst providing incentives for innovators at a similar level
to today.

Appendix 3: Health impact measurement
-------------------------------------

At the most basic level, health impact can be measured simply by
dividing the cost of treatment by the number of lives saved.[^97]
However, with this approach it is hard to compare between interventions:
is \$100 for a successful hip replacement more or less effective than
\$100 for a cancer diagnosis? It is therefore necessary to standardise
when measuring health impact.[^98] The most common form of
standardisation is the QALY.[^99] This metric assigns a year of perfect
health the value 1, and death the value 0. All states of health short of
perfect health can then be measured on this scale.[^100] An alternative
metric, more common in global health,[^101] is the DALY. This also
adjusts the value of a year of life, but using the severity of
particular disabling health outcome as a weighting.[^102]

These measurements constitute a robust base which could be elaborated
upon. Each scale could be adjusted further to ensure appropriate and
fair incentive is provided to reflect the medical landscape as a whole.
For example, in the case orphan diseases, a logarithmic weighting could
provide these scales with the nuance required to incentivize their
research and innovation as well as for blockbuster drugs. Different
weighting methods would have to be compared to the the simple linear
proportional QALY payment to ensure all illnesses are considered and
incentivized appropriately. Alternatively, special values could also be
created to fit the incentive required for orphan disease innovation.
Finally, there are alternative measurement systems, such as Healthy Year
Equivalents or Saved-Young-Life Equivalents,[^103] all of which could be
explored in a feasibility study for a remuneration rights fund.

Appendix 4: The Spotify Model
------------------------------

If the remuneration rights model is desirable, practical, economically
fit, legal and possible, it is fair to wonder whether similar
initiatives have been done before. Spotify, the music streaming service,
is a good example of a business that has exploited - to an extent - the
model which reward innovators without restricting access. The platform
opens a large music library to its users for a monthly cost, and
redistributes the bulk of their income to the artists in proportion of
their impact (calculated according to a number of metrics including
artist popularity and number of streams). With over 140 million users,
Spotify is one of the most popular means to access music globally.

Much like medicines, music has extremely low cost of copy (close to
zero), with larger costs of production combined with millions of people
willing to stream and listen. But the traditional way to buy music,
through highly priced individual items (tracks or albums) in exchange of
lifelong access, greatly limits the breadth of music one can access.
Paying per item is not only an inefficient investment of user's money,
it also reduces user's capacity to discover new artists and allocate
their funds more evenly. That's why Spotify's monthly fee - currently
\$9.99 - for an unlimited access to Spotify's entire music catalogue is
very competitive and the company fast growing. Between March and July
2017, the company boasted the addition of 10 million paying subscribers.

Spotify operates in many similar ways to the proposed Remuneration
Rights model. The provider gathers a large music library on its platform
and users pay a monthly subscription to access the library. The money is
then centralized by Spotify, much like the Remuneration Rights would
pool its fund together by gathering health buyers contributions. Spotify
then redistributes 70% of its income to compensate the content creators
who drive the platform - or more accurately to their record label. The
level of compensation is proportional to the impact of an artists music.
This is very similar to how pharmaceutical innovators would be
remunerated under a Remuneration Rights model, which would be determined
as a function of the health impact of their drug. As a result, people
have access and freedom to explore a broad range of music for a fixed
price while ensuring creators are still rewarded for their efforts. This
is similar to how people will be able to access the medicines they need
for an affordable price while still allowing innovators to be rewarded.

This is technically feasible because, like innovators, artists are
clearly identified as the authors of their work. The platform has a
built in system that quantifies the 'impact' of each song by recording
how many times it has been played. The political management is slightly
different than what is commonly assumed. Artists do not receive a fixed
amount of money per stream. Instead, the total royalties (70%) are split
and distributed depending on what percentage of total Spotify streams a
song has garnered. As a result, remuneration fluctuates each month
depending on the number of subscribers paying into the system and what
music is played that month. Additionally, the money does not go directly
go to the artist. Record labels often license the music to Spotify, then
distribute the remuneration they receive amongst their artists after
taking a cut, the size of which will typically depend on individual
record contracts. While Spotify's model is not perfect or optimal (its
library lacks in openness, for example, and there have been some
criticisms of unfair remuneration by some high profile artists), but it
is operational, legal and successful.

Spotify proves that these systems can and do work, allowing access and
innovation to thrive together. Like the Remuneration Rights model, the
overall improvements in terms of increased access and reduced cost, by
far outweighs the limitations of the Spotify model. While Spotify is
limited in its openness (its library is not complete) and its prices are
higher than cost, due to the private holding of the company. Such
pitfalls would not occur within the Remuneration Rights system. First,
because open and universal access - to innovative knowledge and
medicines - are a fundamental priority of the model, the restrictions of
Spotify's limited catalogue will be overcome. Second, public holding of
the fund would ensure that costs are optimally fitted to maximise health
impact for the exact same cost we currently pay, rather than for
shareholders profits.

If all requirements for such a system already exist and no (major) legal
adjustment is required for the system to flourish, then it is fair to
wonder why it did not happen earlier. To an extent, it did, with Napster
which was later declared illegal in 2001. The major problem which
brought Naspter to its end was that while it was not hosting any content
itself it was enabling massive copyright infringement by its users who
were downloading and listening to music without payment or permission.
Spotify solved this issue by intentionally making great efforts to limit
that and make their online services function like radio. Radio stations
have a \"blanket\" license from something called a \"collecting
society\" that permit them to broadcast music without getting a license
from each individual music copyright holder. The special legal status
with respect to copyright held by radio is the result of decades of
negotiation and law-making that created a trade-off between copyright
holders like recording companies and radio stations owned by
broadcasters.

[^1]: Note: access means the availability for use if that use is
    appropriate, it does not mean simple usage. For example, in the case
    of anti-microbial resistance one may want to limit antibiotics usage
    in order to preserve efficacy (you could also interpret this as
    maximizing access *over the long-term*.)

[^2]: Rabah Kamal and Cynthia Cox "What Are the Recent and Forecasted
    Trends in Prescription Drug Spending?" Peterson-Kaiser Health System
    Tracker; "Health Spending Explorer" Peterson-Kaiser Health System
    Tracker; "A Look Back at Pharmaceuticals in 2006: Aggressive
    Advertising Cannot Hide the Absence of Therapeutic Advances"; "New
    Products and New Indications in 2016: A System That Favours
    Imitation over the Pursuit of Real Progress."

[^3]: "Pharma 2020: The Vision Which Path Will You Take?", p. 12.

[^4]: Rabah Kamal and Cynthia Cox "What Are the Recent and Forecasted
    Trends in Prescription Drug Spending?" Peterson-Kaiser Health System
    Tracker.

[^5]: "Health Spending Explorer" Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker.

[^6]: Crow, "Pfizer Raises US Prices of 91 Drugs by 20% in 2017."

[^7]: Frost, Reich, and others, *Access*, p. 2; "Delivering on the
    Global Partnership for Achieving the Millennium Development Goals",
    p. 43.

[^8]: For further information on the different components of access, see
    Bigdeli, Peters, and Wagner, "Medicines in Health Systems"; Frost,
    Reich, and others, *Access*; Peters et al., "Poverty and Access to
    Health Care in Developing Countries"; Wirtz et al., "Essential
    Medicines for Universal Health Coverage."

[^9]: Frost, Reich, and others, *Access*, p. 26.

[^10]: "WHO \| Estimates of Disease Burden and Cost-Effectiveness."

[^11]: "WHO \| Immunization Coverage."

[^12]: "GHO \| By Category \| Antiretroviral Therapy Coverage - Data and
    Estimates by Country."

[^13]: "WHO \| Hepatitis C"; "Global Hepatitis Report, 2017."

[^14]: "GHO \| By Category \| Treatment Coverage - Data by WHO Region."

[^15]: "Promoting Innovation and Access to Health Technologies", p. 7.

[^16]: Røttingen et al., "Mapping of Available Health Research and
    Development Data."

[^17]: Wirtz et al., "Essential Medicines for Universal Health
    Coverage", p. 456.

[^18]: Røttingen et al., "Mapping of Available Health Research and
    Development Data."

[^19]: Seddoh et al., "Towards an Investment Case for Neglected Tropical
    Diseases."

[^20]: Smedley, "Is It Fair to Accuse the Pharma Industry of Neglecting
    Tropical Diseases?"

[^21]: "Anti-Aging Market (Baby Boomer, Generation X and Generation Y),
    by Product (Botox, Anti-Wrinkle Products, Anti-Stretch Mark
    Products, and Others), by Services (Anti-Pigmentation Therapy,
    Anti-Adult Acne Therapy, Breast Augmentation, Liposuction, Chemical
    Peel, Hair Restoration Treatment, and Others), by Device
    (Microdermabrasion, Laser Aesthetics, Anti-Cellulite Treatment and
    Anti-Aging Radio Frequency Devices) : Global Industry Perspective,
    Comprehensive Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Segment, Trends and
    Forecast, 2015 -- 2021."

[^22]: Light and Lexchin, "Pharmaceutical Research and Development."

[^23]: Love and Hubbard, "The Big Idea", p. 1524.

[^24]: Wirtz et al., "Essential Medicines for Universal Health
    Coverage", p. 453.

[^25]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 87.

[^26]: Scotchmer, *Innovation and Incentives*, p. 14.

[^27]: Matthijs and Halley, "European-Wide Opposition against the Breast
    Cancer Gene Patents."

[^28]: Moser and Voena, "Compulsory Licensing."

[^29]: See Scotchmer, *Innovation and Incentives*, Chapter 1 on this
    history.

[^30]: Technically, from a legal perspective remuneration rights are
    liability rights whilst patents are more like property rights.
    However, this distinction

[^31]: See Section 2.2 and Appendix 3.

[^32]: See also Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New
    Medicines Accessible for All*, p. 6.

[^33]: Ravvin, "Incentivizing Access and Innovation for Essential
    Medicines", p. 115.

[^34]: See "Horizon ​Scan ​Report", p. 14 for more information.

[^35]: Jon Cohen, "How the Battle Lines over CRISPR Were Drawn."

[^36]: See Appendix 3 for more information.

[^37]: "Judging Whether Public Health Interventions Offer Value for
    Money \| Guidance and Guidelines"; Gold, *Cost-Effectiveness in
    Health and Medicine*, xx. For other examples, see Hollis and Pogge,
    *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines Accessible for All*,
    p. 27.

[^38]: Prescribing data is more available in developed countries. In
    other cases one could use data from wholesalers and distributors
    even if the data was more crude.

[^39]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 27.

[^40]: "The World Bank \| Data, United-States."

[^41]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 37.

[^42]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 40.

[^43]: See Appendix 1.

[^44]: Previous submissions of this proposal are Sanders, "Text -
    H.R.417 - 109th Congress (2005-2006)"; Sanders, "Text - S.2210 -
    110th Congress (2007-2008)"; Sanders, "Text - S.1137 - 112th
    Congress (2011-2012)"; Sanders, "Text - S.1138 - 112th Congress
    (2011-2012)"; and Sanders, "Text - S.627 - 113th Congress
    (2013-2014)."

[^45]: Sanders, "Text - S.495 - 115th Congress (2017-2018)."

[^46]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 37.

[^47]: "Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing
    Countries: Strengthening Global Financing and Coordination", pp.
    14-16; "WHO \| Meeting the Need for Treatment"; "How a Global R&D
    Convention Could Fill the Gaps Left by Today's Medical Innovation
    System."

[^48]: For a more detailed comparison of the remuneration rights system
    with similar proposals, see Appendix 1.1.

[^49]: Sanders, "Text - S.495 - 115th Congress (2017-2018)."

[^50]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 2.

[^51]: Reiffen and Ward, "Generic Drug Industry Dynamics", p. 38.

[^52]: Love, "Measures to Enhance Access to Medical Technologies, and
    New Methods of Stimulating Medical R&D", p. 704.

[^53]: "Longitude Prize \| Enter the Prize."

[^54]: "Medicines Patent Pool."

[^55]: "Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing
    Countries: Strengthening Global Financing and Coordination", p. 170.

[^56]: One option in valuing the difference between existing monopoly
    rights and new remuneration

    rights would be an auction process similar to that described in
    Kremer, "Patent Buyouts."

[^57]: As advocated by Aidan Hollis and Thomas Pogge in Hollis and
    Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines Accessible for
    All*. For criticism of this approach, see Love and Hubbard, "The Big
    Idea."

[^58]: See Burfisher, Robinson, and Thierfelder, "The Impact of NAFTA on
    the United States", Lesher and Miroudot, "Analysis of the Economic
    Impact of Investment Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements", pp.
    29-32.

[^59]: See Crafts, "The Growth Effects of EU Membership for the UK:
    Review of the Evidence."

[^60]: See Scotchmer, *Innovation and Incentives*, pp. 19-21.

[^61]: "Historical Stock Market Reactions to Geopolitical and Economic
    Crisis Events." See also the data on Perlberg, "This Is What Happens
    To The Stock Market When Terrible Things Happen In The World."

[^62]: Frost, Reich, and others, *Access*, p. 2; "Delivering on the
    Global Partnership for Achieving the Millennium Development Goals",
    p. 43.

[^63]: Reiffen and Ward, "Generic Drug Industry Dynamics", p. 38.

[^64]: MSF, "Untangling the Web of Antiretroviral Price Reductions" 16th
    Ed., p. 2.

[^65]: Unless otherwise stated, prices are per person per year.

[^66]: For an overview, see Burt, "Lessons to Be Learnt? - An Overview
    of Tendering Processes for Medicines across Europe." Another
    potential scheme would be reference pricing. See Koskinen et al.,
    "The Impact of Reference Pricing and Extension of Generic
    Substitution on the Daily Cost of Antipsychotic Medication in
    Finland" for an example of how this works in practice in Finland.

[^67]: See Pedersen, "Pricing and Reimbursement of Drugs in Denmark."

[^68]: See "The Swedish Pharmaceutical Reimbursement System" and
    Kanavos, Seeley, and Vandoros, "Tender Systems for Outpatient
    Pharmaceuticals in the European Union", especially p. 35.

[^69]: Dylst, Vulto, and Simoens, "Tendering for Outpatient Prescription
    Pharmaceuticals."

[^70]: Scotchmer, *Innovation and Incentives*, p. 2.

[^71]: See Boldrin and Levine, *Against Intellectual Monopoly*, Chapter
    9.

[^72]: See Moser and Voena, "Compulsory Licensing."

[^73]: Sanders, "Text - S.495 - 115th Congress (2017-2018)."

[^74]: Love and Hubbard, "Prizes for Innovation of New Medicines and
    Vaccines", p. 171.

[^75]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 4.

[^76]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 10.

[^77]: "The Medical Innovation Prize Fund: A New Paradigm for Supporting
    Sustainable Innovation and Access to New Drugs: De-Linking Markets
    for Products from Markets for Innovation", p. 2.

[^78]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, pp. 10-11.

[^79]: Scotchmer, *Innovation and Incentives*, p. 36.

[^80]: Hollis, "An Efficient Reward System for Pharmaceutical
    Innovation", p. 6.

[^81]: Baker, "Financing Drug Research: What Are the Issues?", p. 2.

[^82]: "Delivering on the Global Partnership for Achieving the
    Millennium Development Goals", p. 35.

[^83]: Scotchmer, Suzanne. Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge, Mass. ;
    London: MIT Press, 2004, p. 36.

[^84]: World health Organisation (WHO),
    http://www.who.int/hia/about/glos/en/index1.html

[^85]: See also "Horizon ​Scan ​Report" throughout for more detailed
    information.

[^86]: "Resolution On Cancer Hailed By WHO Members, Easily Adopted In
    Committee", "Geneva Technical Workshop on Proposals for a Cancer
    Innovation Fund (CIF) -- Union for Affordable Cancer Treatment."

[^87]: "The Medical Innovation Prize Fund: A New Paradigm for Supporting
    Sustainable Innovation and Access to New Drugs: De-Linking Markets
    for Products from Markets for Innovation."

[^88]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*.

[^89]: "Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing
    Countries: Strengthening Global Financing and Coordination",
    "WHA59.24: Public Health, Innovation, Essential Health Research and
    Intellectual Property Rights: Towards a Global Strategy and Plan of
    Action", "Global Strategy on Public Health, Innovation and
    Intellectual Property."

[^90]: "The PDP+ Fund."

[^91]: "Fund for Research and Development in Neglected Diseases."

[^92]: "Selected Innovation Prizes and Reward Programs."

[^93]: Ravvin, "Incentivizing Access and Innovation for Essential
    Medicines", p. 115.

[^94]: Stiglitz, "Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property Rights",
    p. 1724; Love and Hubbard, "The Big Idea", p. 1553.

[^95]: An exception is the recent development of direct government
    grants to small and medium companies, especially in developing
    economies, for R&D and capacity building. See Paul Cunningham,
    Abdullah Gök, and Philippe Laredo, "The Impact of Direct Support to
    R&D and Innovation in Firms."

[^96]: Hollis and Pogge, *The Health Impact Fund: Making New Medicines
    Accessible for All*, p. 102; Ravvin, "Incentivizing Access and
    Innovation for Essential Medicines", pp. 115-116.

[^97]: Neumann, *Using Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Improve Health
    Care*, p. 8.

[^98]: Neumann, *Using Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Improve Health
    Care*, p. 8.

[^99]: Drummond, *Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Health Care
    Programmes*, p. 3.

[^100]: Gold, *Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine*, p. 171.

[^101]: Gold, *Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine*, p. 23.

[^102]: Gold, *Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine*, p. 171.

[^103]: Drummond, *Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Health Care
    Programmes*, ch. 6.
